4038 Part XXIX u The Skin

Chapter 687

Principles of
Dermatologic Therapy
Stephen R. Humphrey

Fig. 686.14 Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis is char-

acterized by the acute onset of fever and generalized erythema with
numerous small, discrete, sterile, nonfollicular pustules. Pustules may
appear in a few days after the drug therapy is started. Pustules resolve
in <15 days, followed by desquamation. (From Habif TP, ed. Clinical
Dermatology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2004: p. 490.)

FIXED-­DRUG ERUPTION

Fixed-­drug eruption (FDE) occurs minutes to hours after exposure
to a drug and is characterized by mild pruritus or burning of a well-­
circumscribed, dusty red, brown, gray or, if severe, violaceous patch
appearing on the extremities, trunk, lips, or genitals (Fig. 686.13).
There is usually one lesion that, on reexposure to the drug, appears
in the same (fixed) location as the previous episode, often appearing more rapidly. On occasion, there may be two or more lesions.
Stopping the offending agent is required; the FDE will then resolve
within 10-­14 days, often with residual hyperpigmentation. Offending medications include sulfonamides, tetracyclines, NSAIDs, and
acetaminophen.

ACUTE GENERALIZED EXANTHEMATOUS
PUSTULOSIS

Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis is often drug-­related
(most commonly aminopenicillins, macrolides, sulfonamides),
occurring within hours to days after drug exposure. It is characterized by many nonfollicular sterile pustules with underlying
edema and erythema, typically beginning on the face and intertriginous regions (Fig. 686.14). Neutrophilia and fever are common,
whereas eosinophilia is less common than in DRESS syndrome. The
rash may burn or itch; mucous membrane involvement is rare and
often mild. Internal organ involvement is not common and often
is asymptomatic. A pustular smear is always indicated to rule out
infection in the setting of leukocytosis, fever, and a pustular rash.
Differential diagnosis includes generalized pustular psoriasis, bullous impetigo, IgA pemphigus, and subcorneal pustular dermatosis.
Therapy consists of stopping the causative drug and offering symptomatic relief with moist dressings, emollients, and mid-­potency
topical corticosteroids (applied twice daily for 1-­2 weeks).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Competent skin care requires an appreciation of primary versus secondary lesions, a specific diagnosis, and knowledge of the natural
course of the disease. If the diagnosis is uncertain, it is better to err on
the side of less aggressive rather than more aggressive treatment.
In the use of topical medication, consideration of vehicle is as important as the specific therapeutic agent. Acute weeping lesions respond
best to wet compresses, followed by lotions or creams. For dry, thickened, scaly skin, or for treatment of a contact allergic reaction possibly
the consequence of a component of a topical medication, an ointment
base is preferable, as it helps to occlude and moisten the affected area.
Gels and solutions are most useful for the scalp and other hairy areas
because of their faster absorption. The site of involvement is of considerable importance because the most desirable vehicle may not be cosmetically or functionally appropriate, such as an ointment on the face
or hands. A patient’s preference should also play a part in the choice of
vehicle because compliance is poor if a medication is not acceptable
to a patient. Ointments tend to sting less and are the least irritating.
Cosmetically acceptable foam delivery systems have been developed,
and the number of products and formulations available is increasing.
Most lotions are mixtures of water and oil that can be poured. After
the water evaporates, the small amount of remaining oil covers the
skin. Some shake lotions are a suspension of water and insoluble powder; as the water evaporates, cooling the skin, a thin film of powder
covers the skin. Creams are emulsions of oil and water that are viscous
and do not pour (more oil than in lotions). Ointments have oils and a
small amount of water or no water at all; they feel greasy, lubricate dry
skin, trap water, and aid in occlusion. Ointments without water usually require no preservatives because microorganisms require water to
survive. Because of this, ointments often have the lowest number and
concentration of ingredients, decreasing the risk of sensitizing the skin.
Therapy should be kept as simple as possible, and specific written
instructions about the frequency and duration of application should be
provided. Physicians should become familiar with one or two preparations in each category and should learn to use them appropriately.
Prescribing nonspecific proprietary medications that may contain sensitizing agents should be avoided. Certain preparations, such as topical
antihistamines and sensitizing anesthetics, are never indicated.

WET DRESSINGS

Wet dressings cool and dry the skin by evaporation and cleanse it by
removing crusts and exudate, which would cause further irritation if
permitted to remain. The dressings decrease pruritus, burning, and
stinging sensations and are indicated for acutely inflamed moist or oozing dermatitis. Although various astringent and antiseptic substances
may be added to the solution, cool or tepid tap water compresses are
just as effective. Dressings of multiple layers of Kerlix, gauze, or soft
cotton material may be saturated with water and remoistened as often
as necessary. Compresses should be applied for 10-­20 minutes at least
every 4 hours and should usually be continued for 24-­48 hours.
Alternatively, cotton pajamas can be soaked in water and then wrung as
dry as possible. These are placed on the child and covered with dry pajamas, preferably sleeper pajamas with feet. The child should sleep in these
overnight. This type of dressing can be used nightly for up to 1 week.
Wet dressings or wet wraps in conjunction with topical steroids
may also be used in more severe cases of dermatitis (e.g., atopic dermatitis). In this method, a thin layer of the topical steroid is applied
to the affected areas, which are then covered with warm, wet wraps

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4038 Part XXIX u The Skin

Chapter 687

Principles of
Dermatologic Therapy
Stephen R. Humphrey

Fig. 686.14 Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis is char-

acterized by the acute onset of fever and generalized erythema with
numerous small, discrete, sterile, nonfollicular pustules. Pustules may
appear in a few days after the drug therapy is started. Pustules resolve
in <15 days, followed by desquamation. (From Habif TP, ed. Clinical
Dermatology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2004: p. 490.)

FIXED-­DRUG ERUPTION

Fixed-­drug eruption (FDE) occurs minutes to hours after exposure
to a drug and is characterized by mild pruritus or burning of a well-­
circumscribed, dusty red, brown, gray or, if severe, violaceous patch
appearing on the extremities, trunk, lips, or genitals (Fig. 686.13).
There is usually one lesion that, on reexposure to the drug, appears
in the same (fixed) location as the previous episode, often appearing more rapidly. On occasion, there may be two or more lesions.
Stopping the offending agent is required; the FDE will then resolve
within 10-­14 days, often with residual hyperpigmentation. Offending medications include sulfonamides, tetracyclines, NSAIDs, and
acetaminophen.

ACUTE GENERALIZED EXANTHEMATOUS
PUSTULOSIS

Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis is often drug-­related
(most commonly aminopenicillins, macrolides, sulfonamides),
occurring within hours to days after drug exposure. It is characterized by many nonfollicular sterile pustules with underlying
edema and erythema, typically beginning on the face and intertriginous regions (Fig. 686.14). Neutrophilia and fever are common,
whereas eosinophilia is less common than in DRESS syndrome. The
rash may burn or itch; mucous membrane involvement is rare and
often mild. Internal organ involvement is not common and often
is asymptomatic. A pustular smear is always indicated to rule out
infection in the setting of leukocytosis, fever, and a pustular rash.
Differential diagnosis includes generalized pustular psoriasis, bullous impetigo, IgA pemphigus, and subcorneal pustular dermatosis.
Therapy consists of stopping the causative drug and offering symptomatic relief with moist dressings, emollients, and mid-­potency
topical corticosteroids (applied twice daily for 1-­2 weeks).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Competent skin care requires an appreciation of primary versus secondary lesions, a specific diagnosis, and knowledge of the natural
course of the disease. If the diagnosis is uncertain, it is better to err on
the side of less aggressive rather than more aggressive treatment.
In the use of topical medication, consideration of vehicle is as important as the specific therapeutic agent. Acute weeping lesions respond
best to wet compresses, followed by lotions or creams. For dry, thickened, scaly skin, or for treatment of a contact allergic reaction possibly
the consequence of a component of a topical medication, an ointment
base is preferable, as it helps to occlude and moisten the affected area.
Gels and solutions are most useful for the scalp and other hairy areas
because of their faster absorption. The site of involvement is of considerable importance because the most desirable vehicle may not be cosmetically or functionally appropriate, such as an ointment on the face
or hands. A patient’s preference should also play a part in the choice of
vehicle because compliance is poor if a medication is not acceptable
to a patient. Ointments tend to sting less and are the least irritating.
Cosmetically acceptable foam delivery systems have been developed,
and the number of products and formulations available is increasing.
Most lotions are mixtures of water and oil that can be poured. After
the water evaporates, the small amount of remaining oil covers the
skin. Some shake lotions are a suspension of water and insoluble powder; as the water evaporates, cooling the skin, a thin film of powder
covers the skin. Creams are emulsions of oil and water that are viscous
and do not pour (more oil than in lotions). Ointments have oils and a
small amount of water or no water at all; they feel greasy, lubricate dry
skin, trap water, and aid in occlusion. Ointments without water usually require no preservatives because microorganisms require water to
survive. Because of this, ointments often have the lowest number and
concentration of ingredients, decreasing the risk of sensitizing the skin.
Therapy should be kept as simple as possible, and specific written
instructions about the frequency and duration of application should be
provided. Physicians should become familiar with one or two preparations in each category and should learn to use them appropriately.
Prescribing nonspecific proprietary medications that may contain sensitizing agents should be avoided. Certain preparations, such as topical
antihistamines and sensitizing anesthetics, are never indicated.

WET DRESSINGS

Wet dressings cool and dry the skin by evaporation and cleanse it by
removing crusts and exudate, which would cause further irritation if
permitted to remain. The dressings decrease pruritus, burning, and
stinging sensations and are indicated for acutely inflamed moist or oozing dermatitis. Although various astringent and antiseptic substances
may be added to the solution, cool or tepid tap water compresses are
just as effective. Dressings of multiple layers of Kerlix, gauze, or soft
cotton material may be saturated with water and remoistened as often
as necessary. Compresses should be applied for 10-­20 minutes at least
every 4 hours and should usually be continued for 24-­48 hours.
Alternatively, cotton pajamas can be soaked in water and then wrung as
dry as possible. These are placed on the child and covered with dry pajamas, preferably sleeper pajamas with feet. The child should sleep in these
overnight. This type of dressing can be used nightly for up to 1 week.
Wet dressings or wet wraps in conjunction with topical steroids
may also be used in more severe cases of dermatitis (e.g., atopic dermatitis). In this method, a thin layer of the topical steroid is applied
to the affected areas, which are then covered with warm, wet wraps

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 687 u Principles of Dermatologic Therapy
for approximately 30 minutes to 1 hour 2-­3 times daily. This method
is especially effective in children with extensive and severe dermatitis.

BATH OILS, COLLOIDS, AND SOAPS

Bath oil has little benefit in the treatment of children. It offers little moisturizing effect but increases the risk of injury during a bath. Bath oil may
lubricate the surface of the bathtub, causing an adult or child to fall when
stepping into the tub. Tar bath solutions can be prescribed and may be
helpful for psoriasis and atopic dermatitis. Colloids such as starch powder
and colloidal oatmeal are soothing and antipruritic for some patients when
added to the bathwater. Oilated colloidal oatmeal contains mineral oil and
lanolin derivatives for lubrication if the skin is dry. These can also lubricate
the bathtub surface. Ordinary bath soaps may be irritating and drying if
patients have dry skin or dermatitis. Synthetic soaps are much less irritating. Fragrance-­free soaps and cleansers are often better tolerated and less
likely to irritate skin. Additionally, solid soaps tend to be less irritating, as
they do not have as many preservatives as liquid soap might. When skin is
acutely inflamed, avoidance of soap is advised.

LUBRICANTS

Lubricants, such as lotions, creams, and ointments, can be used as moisturizers for dry skin and as vehicles for topical agents such as corticosteroids
and keratolytics. In general, ointments are the most effective emollients.
Numerous commercial preparations are available. Some patients do not
tolerate ointments, and some may be sensitized to a component of the
lubricant; some preservatives in creams are also sensitizers. These preparations can be applied several times a day if necessary and tolerated. Maximal effect is achieved when they are applied to dry skin 2 or 3 times daily.
Lotions containing menthol and camphor in an emollient vehicle can help
control pruritus and dryness, but the use of moisturizers in addition to
these products is best to decrease skin dryness.

SHAMPOOS

Special shampoos containing sulfur, salicylic acid, zinc, and selenium
sulfide are useful for conditions in which there is scaling of the scalp,
such as seborrheic dermatitis or psoriasis. Tar-­containing shampoos
are useful in these conditions. Most shampoos also contain surfactants
and detergents. They should be used as frequently as necessary to control scaling. Patients should be instructed to leave the lathered shampoo in contact with the scalp for 5-­10 minutes before thorough rinsing.

POWDERS

Powders are hygroscopic and serve as absorptive agents in areas of
excessive moisture. When dry, powders decrease friction between two
surfaces. They are most useful in the intertriginous areas and between
the toes, where maceration and abrasion may result from friction on
movement. Coarse powders may cake; therefore they should be of fine
particle size and inert, unless medication has been incorporated in the
formulation. The use of cornstarch-­based powders in inflamed or broken skin may serve as a good growth environment for microorganisms
and should be avoided.

4039

Table 687.1  Potency of Topical Glucocorticosteroids
CLASS 1—SUPER-POTENT
Betamethasone dipropionate, 0.05% gel, ointment
Clobetasol propionate cream, ointment, 0.05%
Halobetasol propionate cream, ointment, 0.05%
CLASS 2—POTENT
Betamethasone dipropionate cream 0.05%
Desoximetasone cream, ointment, gel 0.05% and 0.25%
Fluocinonide cream, ointment, gel, 0.05%
CLASS 3—UPPER MID-­STRENGTH
Betamethasone dipropionate cream, 0.05%
Betamethasone valerate ointment, 0.1%
Fluticasone propionate ointment, 0.005%
Mometasone furoate ointment, 0.1%
Triamcinolone acetonide cream, 0.5%
CLASS 4—MID-­STRENGTH
Desoximetasone cream, 0.05%
Fluocinolone acetonide ointment, 0.025%
Triamcinolone acetonide ointment, 0.1%
CLASS 5—LOWER MID-­STRENGTH
Betamethasone valerate cream/lotion, 0.1%
Fluocinolone acetonide cream, 0.025%
Fluticasone propionate cream, 0.05%
Triamcinolone acetonide cream/lotion, 0.1%
CLASS 6—MILD STRENGTH
Desonide cream, 0.05%
CLASS 7—LEAST POTENT
Topicals with hydrocortisone, dexamethasone, flumethasone,
methylprednisolone, and prednisolone
From Weston WL, Lane AT, Morelli JG. Color Textbook of Pediatric Dermatology, 4th
ed. St. Louis: Mosby; 2007: p. 418.

be used in treating small infants or on large surface areas or denuded
skin; percutaneous absorption may result in salicylism. The α-­hydroxy
acids, particularly lactic acid and glycolic acid, are available in commercial preparations or can be incorporated in an ointment vehicle in
concentrations up to 12%. Some creams contain both urea and lactic
acid. The α-­hydroxy acid preparations are useful for the treatment of
keratinizing disorders and may be applied once or twice daily. Some
patients complain of burning with the use of these agents; in such cases,
the frequency of application should be decreased.

TAR COMPOUNDS

Pastes contain fine powder in ointment vehicles and are not often prescribed in current dermatologic therapy; in certain situations, however,
they can be used effectively to protect vulnerable or damaged skin. A stiff
zinc oxide paste is bland and inert and can be applied to the diaper area
to prevent further irritation caused by diaper dermatitis. Zinc oxide paste
should be applied in a thick layer, completely obscuring the skin, and is
removed more easily with mineral oil than with soap and water.

Tars are obtained from bituminous coal, shale, petrolatum (coal tars), and
wood. They are antipruritic and astringent and appear to promote normal
keratinization. They may be useful for chronic eczema and psoriasis, and
their efficacy may be increased if the affected area is exposed to UV light
after the tar has been removed. Tars should not be used for acute inflammatory lesions. Tars are often messy and unacceptable because they may stain
and they have an odor. They may be incorporated into shampoos, bath oils,
lotions, and ointments. A useful preparation for pediatric patients is liquor
carbonis detergens (LCD) 2–5% in a cream or ointment vehicle. Tar gel
and tar in light body oil are relatively pleasant cosmetic preparations that
cause minimal staining of skin and fabrics. Tars can also be incorporated
into a vehicle with a topical corticosteroid. The frequency of application
varies from 1-­3 times daily, according to tolerance. Many children refuse
to use tar preparations because of their odor and staining characteristics.

KERATOLYTIC AGENTS

ANTIFUNGAL AGENTS

PASTES

Urea-­containing agents are hydrophilic; they hydrate the stratum corneum and make the skin more pliable. In addition, because urea dissolves hydrogen bonds and epidermal keratin, it is effective in treating
scaling disorders. Concentrations of 10–40% are available in several
commercial lotions and creams, which can be applied once or twice
daily as tolerated. Salicylic acid is an effective keratolytic agent and can
be incorporated into various vehicles in concentrations up to 6% to
be applied 2 or 3 times daily. Salicylic acid preparations should not

Antifungal agents are available as powders, lotions, creams, ointments,
and solutions for the treatment of dermatophyte and yeast infections.
Nystatin, naftifine, and amphotericin B are specific for Candida albicans
and are ineffective in other fungal disorders. Tolnaftate is effective against
dermatophytes but not against yeast. The spectrum for ciclopirox olamine
includes the dermatophytes, Malassezia furfur, and C. albicans. The azoles
clotrimazole, econazole, ketoconazole, miconazole, oxiconazole, and sulconazole have a similar broad spectrum. Butenafine has a similar broad

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4040 Part XXIX u The Skin
spectrum and also has antiinflammatory properties. Terbinafine has
greater activity against dermatophytes but poorer activity against yeasts
than the azoles. The topical antifungal agents should be applied 1-­2 times
a day for most fungal infections. All have low sensitizing potential; additives such as preservatives and stabilizers in the vehicles may cause allergic
contact dermatitis. Ointments containing 6% benzoic acid and 3% salicylic
acid are potent keratolytic agents that have also been used for the treatment
of dermatophyte infections. Irritant reactions are common.

TOPICAL ANTIBIOTICS

Topical antibiotics have been used for many years to treat local cutaneous infections, although their efficacy, with the exception of mupirocin,
fusidic acid, and retapamulin, has been questioned. Ointments are the preferred vehicles (except in the treatment of acne vulgaris; see Chapter 710),
and combinations with other topical agents such as corticosteroids are,
in general, inadvisable. Whenever possible, the etiologic agent should be
identified and treated specifically. Antibiotics in wide use as systemic preparations should be avoided because of the risk of bacterial resistance. The
sensitizing potential of certain topical antibiotics, such as neomycin and
nitrofurazone, should be kept in mind and avoided when possible. Mupirocin, fusidic acid, and retapamulin are the most effective topical agents
currently available and are as effective as oral erythromycin in treatment of
mild to moderate impetigo. Polysporin and bacitracin are not as effective.

TOPICAL CORTICOSTEROIDS

Topical corticosteroids are potent antiinflammatory agents and effective
antipruritic agents. Successful therapeutic results are achieved in a wide
variety of skin conditions. Corticosteroids can be divided into seven different categories on the basis of strength (Table 687.1), but for practical
purposes, four categories can be used: low, moderate, high, and super.
Low-­potency preparations include hydrocortisone, desonide, and hydrocortisone butyrate. Medium-­potency compounds include betamethasone,
flurandrenolide, fluocinolone, mometasone furoate, and triamcinolone.
High-­
potency topical steroids include fluocinonide and halcinonide.
Betamethasone dipropionate, halobetasol, and clobetasol propionate are
superpotent preparations and should be prescribed with care. Some of
these compounds are formulated in several strengths according to clinical
efficacy and degree of vasoconstriction. Physicians using topical steroids
should become familiar with preparations within each class.
All corticosteroids can be obtained in various vehicles, including
creams, ointments, solutions, gels, and aerosols. Some are available in a
foam vehicle. Absorption is enhanced by an ointment or gel vehicle, but
the vehicle should be selected on the basis of the type of disorder and the
site of involvement. Frequency of application should be determined by the
potency of the preparation, the location on the body, and the severity of the
eruption. Applying a thin film 2 times daily usually suffices. Adverse local
effects include cutaneous atrophy, striae, telangiectasia, acneiform eruptions, purpura, hypopigmentation, and increased hair growth. Systemic
adverse effects of high-­potency and superpotent topical steroids occur
with long-­term use and include poor growth, cataracts, and suppression
of adrenal function.
The relative skin thickness should be considered in regard to the selection of class of steroid (see Table 687.1). Thin skin such as the eyelids,
face, groin, and genitalia will absorb a substantial amount of medication
compared to the thickest skin on the palms and soles. One adult fingertip’s
worth of medication is enough to cover an area the size of an adult palm
and is approximately half a gram of medication. Knowing the area being
treated and which medication class to prescribe can decrease the potential
for side effects.
In selected circumstances, corticosteroids may be administered by
intralesional injection (acne cysts, keloids, psoriatic plaques, alopecia
areata, persistent insect bite reactions). Only experienced physicians
should use this method of administration.

TOPICAL NONSTEROIDAL ANTIINFLAMMATORY
AGENTS

Calcineurin-­
inhibiting antiinflammatory agents that inhibit T-­
cell
activation may be used instead of topical steroids for the treatment of
atopic dermatitis and other inflammatory conditions. These agents are
pimecrolimus and tacrolimus. They do not have the adverse local effects

seen with topical steroids. Stinging with application is the most common
complaint and may be lessened by mixing the medication with an ointment such as petrolatum jelly for the initial applications. These agents
are only as strong as medium-­potency topical steroids. In 2006, the FDA
issued a boxed warning for topical calcineurin inhibitors because data
from animal experiments and case reports suggested potential for an
increased risk of lymphoma with systemic use. No clear link between
topical calcineurin inhibitor use and lymphoma risk has been established
despite multiple epidemiologic and clinical studies. Crisaborole, a novel
PDE4 inhibitor, is now approved for mild to moderate atopic dermatitis,
and is another option for nonsteroidal treatments.

SUNSCREENS

Sunscreens are of two general types: (1) those, such as zinc oxide and
titanium dioxide, that absorb all wavelengths of the UV and visible
spectrums and (2) a heterogeneous group of chemicals that selectively
absorb energy of various wavelengths within the UV spectrum. In addition to the spectrum of light that is blocked, other factors to be considered include cosmetic acceptance, sensitizing potential, retention on skin
while swimming or sweating, required frequency of application, and
cost. Sunscreen ingredients include para-­aminobenzoic acid (PABA)
with ethanol, PABA esters, cinnamates, and benzophenone. These block
transmission of the majority of solar UVB and some UVA wavelengths.
Avobenzone and ecamsule are more effective in blocking UVA. Antioxidants may also be found in some sunscreens. Lip protectants that absorb
in the UVB range are also available. Some chemical sunscreens (oxybenzone, octocrylene, and octinoxate) have been implicated in harming
coral reefs and are banned in certain areas of the world.
Sunscreens are designated by sun protection factor (SPF). The SPF is
defined as the amount of time to develop a mild sunburn with the sunscreen compared with the amount of time without the sunscreen. A minimum SPF factor of 30 should be recommended most often. The higher
the SPF, the better the protection is against UVB rays. Sunscreens do not
include any measurement of the efficacy in blocking UVA. The efficacy of
these agents depends on careful attention to instructions for use. Chemical
sunscreens should be applied at least 30 minutes before sun exposure to
permit penetration into the epidermis, again on arrival at the destination,
and every subsequent hour when exposed to direct sunlight. Most patients
with photosensitivity eruptions require protection by agents that absorb
both UVB and UVA wavelengths (see Chapter 697).
Although sunscreens do confer photoprotection and may decrease
the development of nevi, protection is incomplete against all harmful UV light. Midday (10 am to 4 pm) sun avoidance is the primary
method of photoprotection. Clothing, hats, and staying in the shade
offer additional sun protection.

LASER THERAPY

The vascular-­specific pulsed dye laser therapy is used mainly for the
treatment of capillary malformations (port-­wine stains). Spider telangiectasia, small facial pyogenic granulomas, superficial and ulcerated
hemangioma, and warts may also be treated. Vascular-­specific pulsed
dye lasers produce light that is readily absorbed by oxyhemoglobin,
producing selective photothermolysis of vascular lesions.

Ultraviolet Phototherapy

Phototherapy can be a useful treatment for many cutaneous inflammatory disorders, including atopic dermatitis, psoriasis, pityriasis
lichenoides, vitiligo, and a few others. Some benefits of phototherapy include the fact that it is well tolerated, may treat a large area of
the body, and may enable a patient to avoid systemic immunosuppressive agents. There are two traditional modalities of treatment:
psoralen (a photosensitizer) + UVA (PUVA) or narrow-­band UVB
phototherapy (NBUVB). NBUVB phototherapy is most often used,
typically dosed between 1 and 3 times per week, depending on the
condition. There is an increased risk of skin cancers with long-­term
use of PUVA, but there does not seem to be an increased risk for
NBUVB. Risks include burns, though this is quite rare if performed
properly.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 688 u Dermatologic Diseases of the Neonate

Chapter 688

Dermatologic Diseases of
the Neonate
Sarah B. Younger and Kari L. Martin
Minor evanescent lesions of newborn infants, particularly when florid,
may cause undue concern. Most of these entities are relatively common, benign, and transient and do not require therapy.

SEBACEOUS HYPERPLASIA

Minute, profuse, yellow-­white papules are frequently found on the
forehead, nose, upper lip, and cheeks of a term infant; they represent
hyperplastic sebaceous glands (Fig. 688.1). These tiny papules diminish gradually in size and disappear entirely within the first few weeks of
life; no treatment is required.

MILIA

Milia are superficial epidermal inclusion cysts that contain laminated
keratinized material. The lesion is a firm cyst, 1-­2 mm in diameter, and
pearly, opalescent white. Milia may occur at any age, but in neonates are
most frequently scattered over the face and gingivae and on the midline of the palate, where they are called Epstein pearls. Milia exfoliate
spontaneously in most infants and may be ignored; those that appear
in scars or sites of trauma in older children may be gently unroofed and
the contents extracted with a fine-­gauge needle.

SUCKING BLISTERS

Solitary or scattered superficial bullae present at birth on the upper
limbs of infants are presumably induced by vigorous sucking on the
affected part in utero. Common sites are the radial aspect of the forearm, thumb, and index finger. These bullae resolve rapidly without
sequelae. They may occur in conjunction with sucking pads (calluses),
which are found on the lips and are a result of combined intracellular
edema and hyperkeratosis. No treatment is required.

CUTIS MARMORATA

When a newborn infant is exposed to low environmental temperatures,
an evanescent, lacy, reticulated red and/or blue cutaneous vascular pattern appears over most of the body surface. This vascular change represents an accentuated physiologic vasomotor response that disappears
with increasing age, although it is sometimes discernible even in older
children. No treatment is needed.
Cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita presents in a similar fashion but is a vascular anomaly in which the lesions are more

4041

intense, may be segmental, and are persistent despite warming of the
infant. They may be associated with loss of dermal tissue, epidermal
atrophy, and ulceration (Fig. 688.2). The lower extremities are usually
affected, with limb atrophy noted on the affected side. Gradual fading of the livid erythema occurs over 3-­5 years, but limb asymmetry
is permanent. Extracutaneous findings such as ocular and neurologic
abnormalities may be associated in 20–80% of cases. There is no specific treatment.

HARLEQUIN COLOR CHANGE

A dramatic vascular event, harlequin color change occurs transiently
in up to 10% of newborns, most commonly on days 2-­52 of life. It
probably reflects an imbalance in the autonomic vascular regulatory mechanism. When the infant is placed on one side, the body is
bisected longitudinally into a pale upper half and a deep red dependent half. The color change lasts only for a few minutes and occasionally affects only a portion of the trunk or face. Changing the
infant’s position may reverse the pattern. Muscular activity causes
generalized flushing and obliterates the color differential. Repeated
episodes may occur but do not indicate permanent autonomic imbalance. There is generally no need for treatment. This disorder should
be readily distinguishable from harlequin syndrome, which is associated with paroxysmal hemifacial flushing and sweating with or without a Horner syndrome. Symptoms are induced by heat, stress, or
exercise. Some cases are secondary to trauma, cervical cord syrinx,
or neuroblastoma. Although rarely congenital, most cases occur in
older children.

NEVUS SIMPLEX (SALMON PATCH)

Nevus simplex is a small, pale pink, ill-­defined, vascular macule
that occurs most commonly on the glabella, eyelids, upper lip, and
nuchal area of 40–60% of normal newborn infants. These lesions persist for several months and may become more visible during crying
or changes in environmental temperature. Most lesions on the face
eventually fade and disappear completely, although lesions occupying
the entire central forehead often do not. Those on the posterior neck
and occipital areas usually persist. Treatment is not usually indicated,
though pulsed dye laser treatment can be helpful in lightening lesions
that are persistent and cosmetically bothersome. Lesions located in
the midline lumbosacral area and associated with other changes such
as a sinus or pit, patch of hair, or asymmetric gluteal cleft warrant
imaging with ultrasound to evaluate the underlying spinal cord for
spinal dysraphism.
Nevus simplex should not be confused with a port-­wine stain (capillary malformation), which is a permanent lesion and may be associated
with Sturge-­Weber syndrome. Nevus simplex is usually symmetric,
with lesions on both eyelids or on both sides of the midline. Port-­wine
stains are often larger and unilateral, and they usually end along the
midline (see Chapter 691).

Fig. 688.2 Newborn girl with reticulate erythema/livedo on legs, right
Fig. 688.1 Sebaceous hyperplasia. Minute white-­yellow papules on
the nose of a newborn.

arm, and cheeks. (From Pleimes M, Gottler S, Weibel L. Characteristic
congenital reticular erythema: cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenital. J Pediatr. 2013;163:604, Fig. 1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4042 Part XXIX u The Skin
CONGENITAL DERMAL MELANOCYTOSIS (SLATE
GRAY NEVUS)

Congenital dermal melanocytosis, which appears as blue or slate-­gray
macular lesions, has variably defined margins. It occurs most commonly in the sacral area but may be found over the posterior thighs,
legs, back, and shoulders (Fig. 688.3). The spots may be solitary or
numerous and often involve large areas. The peculiar hue of these macules is a result of the dermal location of melanin-­containing melanocytes (mid-­dermal melanocytosis) that are presumably arrested in their
migration from neural crest to epidermis. They usually fade during the
first few years of life as a result of darkening of the overlying skin; no
therapy is required. If lesions persist, they may be treated with lasers,
if desired. Malignant degeneration does not occur. The characteristic appearance and congenital onset distinguish these spots from the
bruises of child abuse. Rarely dermal melanocytosis is associated with
Hurler or Hunter syndrome, GM1 gangliosidosis, Niemann-­Pick disease, mucolipidosis, and mannosidosis. These lesions have previously
been referred to as “Mongolian spots.” This term should be avoided, as
it derives from racist terminology.

ERYTHEMA TOXICUM

A benign, self-­limited, evanescent eruption, erythema toxicum occurs
in approximately 50% of full-­term infants; preterm infants are affected
less commonly. The lesions are firm, yellow-­white, 1-­to 2-­mm papules or pustules with a surrounding erythematous flare (Fig. 688.4).
At times, splotchy erythema is the only manifestation. Lesions may be
sparse or numerous and either clustered in several sites or widely dispersed over much of the body surface. The palms and soles are usually
spared. Peak incidence occurs on the second day of life, but new lesions
may erupt during the first few days as the rash waxes and wanes. Onset
may occasionally be delayed for a few days to weeks in premature
infants. Eosinophils can be demonstrated in Wright-­stained smears of
the intralesional contents. Cultures are sterile.
The cause of erythema toxicum is unknown. The lesions can mimic
pyoderma, candidiasis, herpes simplex, transient neonatal pustular
melanosis, and miliaria but can be differentiated by the characteristic infiltrate of eosinophils and the absence of organisms on a stained

smear. The course is brief (3-­7 days), and lesions generally resolve
without pigmentation. No therapy is required. Incontinentia pigmenti
and eosinophilic pustular folliculitis also have eosinophilic infiltration but can be distinguished by their distribution, histologic type, and
chronicity.

TRANSIENT NEONATAL PUSTULAR MELANOSIS

Pustular melanosis is a transient, benign, self-­limited dermatosis of
unknown etiology that is characterized by three types of lesions: (1)
evanescent superficial pustules, (2) ruptured pustules with a collarette
of fine scale, at times with a central hyperpigmented macule, and (3)
hyperpigmented macules (Fig. 688.5). Lesions are present at birth, and
one or all types of lesions may be found in a profuse or sparse distribution. Pustules represent the early phase of the disorder, and macules, the late phase. The pustular phase rarely lasts more than 2-­3 days;
hyperpigmented macules may persist for as long as 3 months. Sites of
predilection are the anterior neck, forehead, and lower back, although
the scalp, trunk, limbs, palms, and soles may be affected.
The active phase shows an intracorneal or subcorneal pustule filled
with polymorphonuclear leukocytes, debris, and an occasional eosinophil. The macules are characterized only by increased melanization of
epidermal cells. Cultures and smears can be used to distinguish these
pustules from those of pyoderma and erythema toxicum, because the
lesions of pustular melanosis do not contain bacteria or dense aggregates of eosinophils. No therapy is required.

INFANTILE ACROPUSTULOSIS

Onset of infantile acropustulosis generally occurs at 2-­10 months of age;
lesions are occasionally noted at birth (Fig. 688.6). The cause is unknown.
The lesions are initially discrete erythematous papules that become vesiculopustular within 24 hours and subsequently crust over before healing.

Fig. 688.4 Erythema toxicum on the trunk of a newborn infant.

Fig. 688.5 Transient neonatal pustular melanosis. Multiple papules
Fig. 688.3 Extensive dermal melanocytosis on the back of a newborn.
(Courtesy Fitzsimons Army Medical Center teaching file.)

present at birth on the arm of an infant. (From Weston WL, Lane AT,
Morelli JG, eds. Color Textbook of Pediatric Dermatology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2002:331.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 689 u Cutaneous Defects

4043

Chapter 689

Cutaneous Defects
Kari L. Martin
SKIN DIMPLES

Fig. 688.6 Acropustulosis of infancy. Multiple tense erythematous

papules and pustules on the palm of this 4-­mo-­old girl. (From Kliegman
RM, Lye PS, Bordini BJ, Toth H, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­
Based Diagnosis. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017: Fig. 47.3, p. 854.)

They are intensely pruritic. Preferred sites are the palms of the hands
and the soles and sides of the feet, where the lesions may be extensive. A
less dense eruption may be found on the dorsum of the hands and feet,
ankles, and wrists. Pustules occasionally occur elsewhere on the body.
Each episode lasts 7-­14 days, during which time pustules continue to
appear in crops. After a 2-­to 4-­week remission, a new outbreak follows.
This cyclic pattern continues for approximately 2 years; permanent resolution is often preceded by longer intervals of remission between periods
of activity. Infants with acropustulosis are otherwise well.
Wright-­stained smears of intralesional contents show abundant neutrophils or, occasionally, a predominance of eosinophils. Histologically,
well-­circumscribed, subcorneal, neutrophilic pustules, with or without
eosinophils, are noted.
The differential diagnosis in neonates includes transient neonatal
pustular melanosis, erythema toxicum, milia, cutaneous candidiasis,
and staphylococcal pustulosis. In older infants and toddlers, additional diagnostic considerations include scabies, dyshidrotic eczema,
pustular psoriasis, subcorneal pustular dermatosis, and hand-­foot-­
and-­mouth disease. A therapeutic trial of a scabicide is warranted in
equivocal cases.
Therapy is directed at minimizing discomfort for infants. Topical
mid-­to high-­potency corticosteroids and/or oral antihistamines may
decrease the severity of the pruritus and an infant’s irritability. Dapsone
(1-­2 mg/kg/day by mouth, divided in one to two doses) is effective but
has potentially serious side effects, notably, hemolytic anemia and methemoglobinemia; its use should be limited to particularly severe cases.

EOSINOPHILIC PUSTULAR FOLLICULITIS

Eosinophilic pustular folliculitis is defined as recurrent crops of pruritic, coalescing, follicular papulopustules on the face, trunk, and
extremities. Fifty percent of patients have peripheral eosinophilia, with
eosinophil counts exceeding 5%, and approximately 30% have leukocytosis (>10,000 leukocytes/mm3).
Infants account for <10% of all cases of eosinophilic pustular folliculitis. The clinical and histologic appearances of this disorder in infants
closely resemble those in immunocompetent adults, with minor exceptions. In infants, the lesions are most prominent on the scalp, although
they also occur on the trunk and extremities and occasionally are found
on the palms and soles. The classic annular and polycyclic appearance
with centrifugal enlargement is not seen in infants. The differential
diagnosis includes erythema toxicum neonatorum, infantile acropustulosis, localized pustular psoriasis, pustular folliculitis, and transient
neonatal pustular melanosis. High-­potency topical corticosteroids are
the most effective treatment (see Table 687.1).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Cutaneous depressions over bony prominences and in the sacral area,
at times associated with pits and creases, may occur both in normal
children and in association with dysmorphic syndromes. Skin dimples
may develop in utero because of interposition of tissue between a sharp
bony point and the uterine wall, which leads to decreased subcutaneous tissue formation.
Dimples may also be present overlying an area of bone hypoplasia.
Bilateral acromial skin dimples are usually an isolated finding, but they
are also seen in association with deletion of the long arm of chromosome
18. Dimples tend to occur over the patella in congenital rubella, over the
lateral aspects of the knees and elbows in prune-­belly syndrome, on the
pretibial surface in campomelic syndrome, and in the shape of an H on
the chin in Freeman-­Sheldon (“whistling face”) syndrome.
Sacral dimples are common and usually are isolated findings. They
may be seen in multiple syndromes or in association with spina bifida
occulta and diastematomyelia. Association with a mass or other cutaneous stigma (hair, aplasia cutis, lipoma, hemangioma) should increase
concern for underlying spinal dysraphism (see Chapter 631). Simple
sacral dimples do not predict underlying spinal cord malformations,
and spinal ultrasounds should not be performed in these cases because
most of the abnormal findings reported in them are of no clinical significance. In infants younger than 3 months who warrant imaging,
ultrasound is an initial, cost-­effective, noninvasive method. If there is
serious concern of an underlying defect, MRI is indicated. MRI of the
spine is the imaging modality of choice for patients older than 3 months if
there is a strong suspicion of a spinal dysraphism.

REDUNDANT SKIN

Loose folds of skin must be differentiated from a congenital defect of
elastic tissue or collagen such as cutis laxa, Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome, or
pseudoxanthoma elasticum. Redundant skin over the posterior part of
the neck is common in Turner, Noonan, Down, and Klippel-­Feil syndromes and monosomy 1p36; more generalized folds of skin occur in
infants with trisomy 18 and short-­limbed skeletal dysplasia.

AMNIOTIC CONSTRICTION BANDS

Partial or complete constriction bands that produce defects in extremities and digits are found in 1 in 10,000-­45,000 otherwise normal infants.
Constrictive tissue bands are caused by primary amniotic rupture, with
subsequent entanglement of fetal parts, particularly limbs, in shriveled
fibrotic amniotic strands. This event is probably sporadic, with negligible
risk of recurrence. Formation of constrictive tissue bands is associated
with maternal history of abdominal trauma, amniocentesis, and hereditary defects of collagen such as Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome and osteogenesis
imperfecta. Treatment traditionally involves multiple surgical elongating
procedures such as Z-­and W-­plasties. A surgical alternative uses lipoinjection and multiple internal incisions on the deep surface of the band.
Adhesive bands involve the craniofacial area and are associated with
severe defects such as encephalocele and facial clefts. Adhesive bands
result from broad fusion between disrupted fetal tissue and an intact
amniotic membrane. The craniofacial defects appear not to be caused
by constrictive amniotic bands, but to result from a vascular disruption
sequence with or without cephaloamniotic adhesion (see Chapter 100).
The limb–body wall complex involves vascular disruption early in
development, affecting several embryonic structures; it includes at least
two of the following three characteristics: exencephaly or encephalocele with facial clefts, thoracoschisis and/or abdominoschisis, and limb
defects.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4044 Part XXIX u The Skin
PREAURICULAR SINUSES AND PITS

Pits and sinus tracts anterior to the pinna may be a result of imperfect
fusion of the tubercles of the first and second branchial arches. These
anomalies may be unilateral or bilateral, may be familial, and at times
are associated with other anomalies of the ears and face. Preauricular
pits are present in branchiootorenal dysplasia 1 syndrome (EYA-­1
gene), an autosomal dominant disorder that consists of external ear
malformations, branchial fistulas, hearing loss, and renal anomalies.
When the tracts become chronically infected, retention cysts may form
and drain intermittently; such lesions may require excision.

ACCESSORY TRAGI

An accessory tragus typically appears as a single pedunculated, flesh-­
colored papule in the preauricular region anterior to the tragus. Less
commonly, accessory tragi are multiple or bilateral and may be located
in the preauricular area, on the cheek along the line of the mandible
(Fig. 689.1), or on the lateral aspect of the neck anterior to the sternocleidomastoid muscle. In contrast to the rest of the pinna, which
develops from the second branchial arch, the tragus and accessory
tragi derive from the first branchial arch. Accessory tragi may occur
as isolated defects or in chromosomal first branchial arch syndromes
that include anomalies of the ears and face, such as cleft lip, cleft palate,
and mandibular hypoplasia. An accessory tragus is consistently found
in oculoauriculovertebral syndrome (Goldenhar syndrome). Other
associated syndromes include mandibulofacial dysostosis (Treacher
Collins syndrome), Townes-­Brocks, VACTERL, and Wolf-­Hirschhorn
syndrome. Surgical excision is appropriate if cosmetically desired.
Studies are controversial on whether patients with accessory tragi
and preauricular pits have a higher prevalence of hearing loss and urinary tract anomalies. Renal ultrasound should be performed when found
with at least one of the following: other malformations or dysmorphic
features; family history of deafness, auricular, and/or renal malformation; or a maternal history of gestational diabetes.

BRANCHIAL CLEFT AND THYROGLOSSAL CYSTS
AND SINUSES

Cysts and sinuses in the neck may be formed along the course of the
first, second, third, or fourth branchial clefts as a result of improper
closure during embryonic life. Second branchial cleft cysts are the most
common. The lesions may be unilateral or bilateral (2–3%) and may
open onto the cutaneous surface or drain into the pharynx. Secondary
infection is an indication for systemic antibiotic therapy. These anomalies may be inherited as autosomal dominant traits.
Thyroglossal cysts and fistulas are similar defects located in or near
the midline of the neck; they may extend to the base of the tongue. A
pathognomonic sign is vertical motion of the mass with swallowing
and tongue protrusion. In nearly 50% of affected children, the cyst or
fistula manifests as an infected midline upper neck mass. Cysts in the
tongue base may be differentiated from an undescended lingual thyroid by radionuclide scanning. Unlike branchial cysts, a thyroglossal duct cyst often appears after an upper respiratory infection (see
Chapter 601).

PILONIDAL SINUS AND ABSCESS

The etiology of pilonidal disease remains unknown; three hypotheses
explaining its origin have been proposed. The first states that trauma,
such as can occur with prolonged sitting, impacts hair into the subcutaneous tissue, which serves as a nidus for infection. The second suggests
that in some patients, hair follicles exist in the subcutaneous tissues,
perhaps the result of some embryologic abnormality, and that they
serve as a focal point for infection, especially with secretion of hair oils.
The third speculates that motion of the buttocks disturbs a particularly
deep midline crease and works bacteria and hair beneath the skin. This
theory arises from the apparent improved short-­term and long-­term
results of operations that close the wound off the midline, obliterating
the deep natal cleft.
Pilonidal disease usually manifests in adolescents or young adults
with significant hair over the midline sacral and coccygeal areas. It can
occur as an acute abscess with a tender, warm, flocculent, erythematous swelling or as draining sinus tracts. This disease does not resolve
with nonoperative treatment. An acute abscess should be drained and
packed open, using appropriate anesthesia. Oral broad-­spectrum antibiotics covering the usual isolates (Staphylococcus aureus and Bacteroides species) are prescribed, and the patient’s family withdraws the
packing over the course of a week. When the packing has been totally
removed, the area can be kept clean by a bath or shower. The wound
usually heals completely in 6 weeks. Once the wound is healed, most
pediatric surgeons feel that elective excision should be scheduled to
avoid recurrence. There are some reports, however, that this is only
necessary if the disease recurs. Usually, patients who present with sinus
tracts are managed with a single elective excision.
Most surgeons carefully identify the extent of each sinus tract and
excise all skin and subcutaneous tissue involved to the fascia covering
the sacrum and coccyx. Some close the wound in the midline; others leave it open and packed for healing by secondary intention. This
method has been modified by the application of a vacuum-­assisted
(VAC sponge) dressing. This is a system that applies continuous suction
to a porous dressing. It is usually changed every 3 days and can be done
at home with the assistance of a nurse. Some marsupialize the wound
by suturing the skin edges down to the exposed fascia covering the
sacrum and coccyx. There appears to be improved success with excision and closure in such a way that the suture line is not in the midline.
Currently there appears to be enthusiasm for the less radical methods
that Bascom has introduced, treating simple sinus tracts with small
local procedures and limiting excision to only diseased tissues, while
still keeping the incision off the midline. Recurrence or wound-­healing
problems are relatively common, occurring in 9–27% of cases. The
variety of treatments and procedures currently being described indicates that all are associated with significant complications and delays in
return to normal activity. Still, it is rare for problems to persist beyond
1-­2 years. Recalcitrant cases are treated by a large, full-­thickness gluteal
flap or skin grafting.

SUPERNUMERARY NIPPLES

Solitary or multiple accessory nipples may occur in a unilateral or
bilateral distribution along a line from the anterior axillary fold to the
inguinal area. Accessory nipples may or may not have areolae and may
be mistaken for congenital nevi. They may be excised for cosmetic
reasons, but otherwise, treatment is not necessary. Renal or urinary
tract anomalies, malignancies—especially genitourinary cancers—and
hematologic abnormalities may rarely occur in children with this finding (see Chapter 588).

APLASIA CUTIS CONGENITA (CONGENITAL
ABSENCE OF SKIN)

Fig. 689.1 Accessory tragus on cheek along jaw line.

Developmental absence of skin is usually noted on the scalp as multiple
or solitary (70%), noninflammatory, well-­demarcated, oval or circular 1-­
to 2-­cm ulcers (Table 689.1). The appearance of lesions varies, depending on when they occurred during intrauterine development. Those that
form early in gestation may heal before delivery and appear as atrophic,
fibrotic scars with associated alopecia, whereas more recent defects may

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 689 u Cutaneous Defects

4045

Table 689.1  Freiden’s Classification of Aplasia
Cutis Congenita
GROUP

DEFINITION

INHERITANCE

1

Isolated scalp involvement; may be
associated with single defects

AD

2

Scalp ACC with limb reduction defects
(Adams-­Oliver syndrome); may be
associated with encephalocele

AD

3

Scalp ACC with epidermal nevus

Sporadic

4

ACC overlying occult spinal dysraphism,
spina bifida, or meningoencephalocele

Sporadic

5

ACC with placental infarcts and/or fetus
Sporadic
papyraceus (disappearing twin syndrome)

6

ACC with epidermolysis bullosa; Bart
phenotype*

AD or AR

7

ACC localized to extremities without
blistering; usually affecting pretibial
areas and dorsum of hands and feet

AD or AR

8

ACC caused by teratogens (e.g.,
Sporadic
varicella, herpes, methimazole, valproic
acid, misoprostol)

9

ACC associated with malformation
Variable
syndromes (e.g., trisomy 13, deletion
4p−, deletion Xp22.1, ectodermal
dysplasia, Johanson-­Blizzard syndrome,
Adams-­Oliver syndrome)

Fig. 689.2 Solitary scalp vertex lesion of aplasia cutis congenita with
hair collar sign.

*Bart phenotype ACC with epidermolysis bullosa and dystrophic nails.
ACC, Aplasia cutis congenital; AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive.
Modified from Frieden IJ. Aplasia cutis congenita: a clinical review and proposal for
classification. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1986;14:646–660.

manifest as ulcerations. Most occur at the vertex of the scalp just lateral
to the midline, but similar defects may also occur on the face, trunk,
and limbs, where they are often symmetric and usually associated with
an intrauterine fetal demise of a twin (fetus papyraceus). The depth
and size of the ulcer vary. Only the epidermis and upper dermis may
be involved, resulting in minimal scarring or hair loss, or less often, the
defect may extend to the deep dermis; to the subcutaneous tissue; and,
rarely, to the periosteum, skull, and dura. Lesions may be surrounded by
a ring of hair known as the hair collar sign (Fig. 689.2). The hair collar
sign may also be associated with an encephalocele, meningocele, heterotopic glial tissue, or a meningothelial hamartoma.
Diagnosis is made on physical findings indicative of in utero disruption of skin development. Lesions are sometimes mistakenly attributed
to scalp electrodes or obstetric trauma. Most are sporadic, but autosomal dominant and recessive cases also occur; some are caused by
pathogenic variants in BMS1.
Although most individuals with aplasia cutis congenita have no
other abnormalities, these lesions may be associated with isolated
physical anomalies or with malformation syndromes, including
Opitz, Adams-­
Oliver, oculocerebrocutaneous, Johanson-­
Blizzard,
and 4p(−), X-­p22 microdeletion syndromes; trisomy 13-­15; and chromosome 16-­18 defects (see Table 689.1). Aplasia cutis congenita may
also be found in association with an overt or underlying embryologic
malformation, such as congenital pulmonary malformations, meningomyelocele, gastroschisis, omphalocele, or spinal dysraphism. Aplasia cutis congenita in association with the vanishing twin syndrome
(fetus papyraceus) is apparently caused by ischemic or thrombotic
events in the placenta and fetus such as the hypovolemia that occurs
with acute transfusion from a surviving to a dying twin. Blistering or
skin fragility and/or absence or deformity of nails in association with
aplasia cutis congenita is a well-­recognized manifestation of epidermolysis bullosa.

Fig. 689.3 An elastic protruding hairless nodule measuring up to 1.5
cm in diameter, with a ring of dark, coarse, long hairs surrounding the
nodule forming a “hair collar.” (From Chien MM, Chen KL, Chiu HC.
The “hair collar” sign. J Pediatr. 2016;168:246.)

Major complications are rare and more often associated with large,
stellate lesions of the midline parietal scalp. Hemorrhage, secondary
local infection, and meningitis have been reported. If the defect is
small, recovery is uneventful, with gradual epithelialization and formation of a hairless atrophic scar over a period of several weeks. Small
bony defects usually close spontaneously in the first year of life. Large
or numerous scalp defects may require repair, but care must be taken,
as abnormal underlying venous structures have complicated surgical
repair. Truncal and limb defects, despite being large, usually epithelialize and form atrophic scars, which can later be revised.
Although the hair collar sign is often associated with aplasia cutis, it
may also be seen with encephaloceles, meningoceles, heterotopic glial
elements, or hamartoma. Brain MRI is often indicated to evaluate for
these lesions in patients with the hair collar sign without aplasia cutis
(Fig. 689.3).

FOCAL FACIAL DERMAL DYSPLASIAS

The focal facial dermal dysplasias (FFDDs) are a rare group of conditions sharing bitemporal or preauricular lesions resembling scars or
aplasia cutis congenita. FFDD1 (Brauer syndrome) is inherited in an
autosomal dominant fashion and typically has mild associated facial
features. FFDD2 (Brauer-­Setleis syndrome) and FFDD3 (Setleis syndrome) are associated with thin, puckered periorbital skin, distichiasis

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4046 Part XXIX u The Skin
and/or absent eyelashes, upslanting palpebral fissures, flat nasal bridge,
large lips, and redundant facial skin. FFDD2 is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion, whereas FFDD3 is autosomal recessive and
caused by pathogenic variants in TWIST2; autosomally dominant cases
of FFDD3 have been reported and are caused by chromosome duplication/triplication of the 1p36.22p36.21 region. FFDD4 has no other
related skin findings; it is inherited both in autosomal dominant and
recessive manners and is caused by pathogenic variants in CYP26C1.

of the lacrimal ducts are occasional manifestations. Oral leukokeratosis
may give rise to squamous cell carcinoma. Other mucous membranes,
including conjunctival, urethral, and genital, may be involved. Infection,
malignancy, pulmonary fibrosis, and bone marrow failure are common,
and death before age 40 years is typical. No effective treatment exists.
Allogenic hemopoietic stem cell transplantation is curative treatment
when bone marrow failure occurs.

FOCAL DERMAL HYPOPLASIA (GOLTZ-­GORLIN
SYNDROME)

Cutis verticis gyrata, an unusual alteration of the scalp that is more
common in males, may be present from birth or may develop during
adolescence. The scalp is characterized by convoluted elevated folds,
1-­2 cm in thickness, usually in the fronto-­occipital axis. Unlike the lax
skin of other disorders, the convolutions cannot generally be flattened
by traction. Primary cutis gyrata may be associated with intellectual
disability, retinitis pigmentosa, sensorineural deafness, and thyroid
aplasia. Secondary cutis gyrata may be the result of chronic inflammatory diseases, tumors, nevi, and acromegaly.

A rare congenital mesoectodermal and ectodermal disorder, focal
dermal hypoplasia is characterized by dysplasia of connective tissue
in the skin and skeleton. This disorder is an X-­linked dominant disorder caused by pathogenic variants in the PORCN gene. It manifests
as numerous soft tan papillomas. Other cutaneous findings include
linear atrophic lesions, reticulated hypopigmentation and hyperpigmentation, telangiectasias, congenital absence of skin, angiofibromas
presenting as verrucous excrescences, and papillomas of the lips,
tongue, circumoral region, vulva, anus, and the inguinal, axillary, and
periumbilical areas. Partial alopecia, sweating disorders, and dystrophic nails are additional, less common ectodermal anomalies. The
most frequent skeletal defects are syndactyly, clinodactyly, polydactyly, and scoliosis. Osteopathia striata are fine parallel vertical stripes
noted on radiographs in the metaphyses of long bones of patients
with this disorder; these are highly characteristic of focal dermal
hypoplasia but are not pathognomonic. Many ocular abnormalities,
the most common of which are colobomas, strabismus, nystagmus,
and microphthalmia, are also characteristic. Small stature, enamel
hypoplasia, soft tissue anomalies, and peculiar dermatoglyphic patterns are also common. Cognitive impairment occurs occasionally.
There is no specific treatment.

DYSKERATOSIS CONGENITA (ZINSSER-­ENGMAN-­
COLE SYNDROME)

Dyskeratosis congenita (DKC), a rare familial syndrome, consists classically of the triad of reticulated hyperpigmentation of the skin (Fig. 689.4),
dystrophic nails, and mucous membrane leukoplakia in association with
immunologic and hematologic abnormalities. Patients with DKC also
show signs of premature aging and increased occurrence of cancer, especially squamous cell carcinoma. DKC may be X-­linked recessive (DKC-­
1 gene), autosomal dominant (hTERC and TINF2 genes), or autosomal
recessive (NOLA3 gene). Onset occurs in childhood, most commonly
as nail dystrophy. The nails become atrophic and ridged longitudinally
with progression to pterygia and complete nail loss. Skin changes usually appear after onset of nail changes and consist of reticulated gray-­
brown pigmentation, atrophy, and telangiectasia, especially on the neck,
face, and chest. Hyperhidrosis and hyperkeratosis of the palms and soles,
sparse scalp hair, and easy blistering of the hands and feet are also characteristic. Blepharitis, ectropion, and excessive tearing because of atresia

Fig. 689.4 Reticulated dyspigmentation on neck of patient with dyskeratosis congenita.

CUTIS VERTICIS GYRATA

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 690

Ectodermal Dysplasias
Kari L. Martin
Ectodermal dysplasia (ED) is a heterogeneous group of disorders
characterized by a constellation of findings involving defects of two or
more of the following: teeth, skin, and appendageal structures, including hair, nails, and eccrine and sebaceous glands. Although more than
150 EDs have been described, the majority are rare, with an estimated
incidence of 3.5 in 10,000 individuals.
Individuals presenting with a constellation of abnormalities involving the teeth, skin, and nails should raise suspicion for a diagnosis of
ED. Table 690.1 provides a general list of abnormalities that may be
seen in patients with EDs. Further specifying the specific type of ED
can be challenging because there are a large number of subtypes and
most are extremely rare (Table 690.2). Exome sequencing may enhance
the identification of these rare subtypes.

Table 690.1  Clinical Abnormalities in Ectodermal
Dysplasia
Teeth

Small primary teeth, anodontia or hypodontia of
secondary teeth, conical or peg teeth, premature loss
of teeth, delayed eruption of teeth, defective enamel,
small widely spaced teeth, elongated pulp chamber
in teeth

Skin

Atopic dermatitis, xerosis, photosensitivity,
palmoplantar keratoderma, facial telangiectasias

Hair

Abnormal quantity, structure and quality: thin, brittle,
slow-­growing, kinky or wooly, fragile, dry, and
lusterless hair. Often involves scalp, eyebrows and
eyelashes.

Nails

Brittle, dystrophic, absent, ridging, pitting

Sweat

Hypohidrosis, hyperhidrosis of palms and soles

Other

Recurrent sinus infection, nasal congestion, hoarse
voice, wheezing

Normal phenotype is also possible for any of these categories.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 690 u Ectodermal Dysplasias 4047
Table 690.2  Classification for Ectodermal Dysplasias*
DISORDER†

INHERITANCE

GENE

PROTEIN

FUNCTION

EDA/NF-­κB PATHWAY
Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia

XLR

EDA1

Ectodysplasin (EDA)

Membrane ligand

Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia

AD

EDAR

EDA receptor (EDAR)

Receptor of EDA

EDARADD

EDAR-­associated death
domain

Adaptor molecule

EDAR

EDAR

Receptor of EDA

EDARADD

EDAR-­associated death
domain

Adaptor molecule

TRAF6

TNF receptor–associated
factor 6

Activates IKK

Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia

AR

Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia
with immune deficiency (males)
± osteopetrosis (males) ±
lymphedema

XLR

NEMO/IKBKG

NF-­kB essential modulator

NF-­kB activation

Incontinentia pigmenti (females)

XLD

NEMO/IKKγ

NF-­κB essential modulator

NF-­κB activation

Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia
with immune deficiency

AR

IkBα

IkBα

NF-­kB activation

P63 PATHWAY
Ectrodactyly-­ectodermal dysplasia-­
clefting syndrome

AD

p63

p63

Transcription factor

Rapp-­Hodgkin syndrome

AD

p63

p63

Transcription factor

Ankyloblepharon-­ectodermal
dysplasia-­clefting syndrome (AEC)

AD

p63

p63

Transcription factor

Acrodermatoungual-­lacrimal-­tooth
(ADULT)

AD

p63

p63

Transcription factor

Limb-­mammary syndrome

AD

p63

p63

Transcription factor

Curly hair, ankyloblepharon,
and nail dystrophy (CHAND)
syndrome

AR

RIPK4

RIPK4

Serine/threonine
protein kinase

Popliteal pterygium syndromes
(spectrum)
Popliteal pterygium
Bartsocas-­Papas
(Cocoon syndrome)

AR, AD

IRF6

IRF6

Transcription factor

AR
AR

RIPK4
CHUK

RIPK4
CHUK

Kinase
Kinase

Ectodermal dysplasia

AD

KDF1

KDF1

Keratinocyte
differentiation factor

Trichodentoosseous syndrome (TDO)

AD

DLX3

DLX3

Transcription factor

Clefting-­ectodermal dysplasia

AR

PVRL1

Nectin 1

Interacts with cadherins,
especially at adherens
junctions

Ectodermal dysplasia-­syndactyly
syndrome

AR

PVRL4

Nectin 4

Interacts with cadherins,
especially at adherens
junctions

Hypotrichosis with juvenile macular
dystrophy ± ectrodactyly/other
ectodermal defects

AR

CDH3

Cadherin 3/P-­cadherin

Adhesion molecule for
cell-­cell binding

WNT PATHWAY
Witkop syndrome

AD

MSX1

MSX1

Transcription factor

Focal dermal hypoplasia

X-­linked dominant

PORCN

PORCN

Regulates Wnt signaling

Oculodentodigital dysplasia (ODDD)

AD

WNT10A

Wnt10A

Wnt pathway

Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia

AR, AD

WNT10A

Wnt10A

β-­catenin-­mediated
signaling

Schöpf-­Schulz-­Passarge syndrome

AR

WNT10A

Wnt10A

β-­catenin-­mediated
signaling

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4048 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 690.2  Classification for Ectodermal Dysplasias*—cont’d
DISORDER†

INHERITANCE

GENE

PROTEIN

FUNCTION

Ectodermal dysplasia

AR

KREMEN1

KREMEN1

Receptor involved in
Wnt regulation

STRUCTURAL ELEMENT
Clouston syndrome

AD

GJB6

Connexin 30

Intercellular junctions

Ectodermal dysplasia

AR

GRHL2

Grainyhead-­like 2

Transcription factor

Oculodentodigital dysplasia (ODDD)

AR

GJA1

Connexin 43

Intercellular junctions

Ellis van Creveld syndrome

AR

EVC, EVC2

EVC, EVC2

Ciliopathy

Ectodermal dysplasia 4, hair/nail type
(ECTD4)

AR

KRT85

KRT85

Keratin

Keratitis-­ichthyosis-­deafness
syndrome, autosomal dominant
(KID)

AR

GJB2

Connexin 26

Intercellular junctions

Ectodermal dysplasia: skin fragility
syndrome

AR

PKP1

Plakophilin 1

Desmosomal plaque/
stability

Naegeli-­ Franceschetti-­Jadassohn
syndrome

AD

KRT14

KRT14

Keratin

Pachyonychia congenita

AD

KRT 6a, 6b, 6c, 16, 17

KRT 6a, 6b, 6c, 16, 17

Keratin

*Many forms of ectodermal dysplasia remain unclassified.
†Some more recently described forms of ectodermal dysplasia are not yet named.
AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; IKK, inhibitor of kappa light polypeptide gene enhancer in B-­cell kinase; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; XLD, X-­linked dominant;
XLR, X-­linked recessive.
From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Table 7.1, p. 165.

HYPOHIDROTIC ECTODERMAL DYSPLASIA

The syndrome known as hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED)
manifests as a triad of defects: partial or complete absence of sweat
glands, anomalous dentition, and hypotrichosis. There are many recognized types of HED; HED-­1 (X-­linked recessive) is most common,
with a frequency of 1 per 17,000 live births.
In HED, affected patients are unable to sweat and may experience episodes of high fever in warm environments, which may be
mistakenly considered to be fevers of unknown origin. This error
is particularly common in infancy when the facial changes are not
easily appreciated. Diagnosis at this time may be made using the
starch-­iodine test or palmar or scalp biopsy. Scalp biopsy is the most
sensitive and is 100% specific. It shows a complete lack of eccrine
structures. Infants and older children must be protected from high
temperatures given their inability to sweat. Cooling devices and
clothing can be helpful to increase participation in activities and
sports. Aside from patients with WNT10A pathogenic variants—
who do not have facial dysmorphism—the typical facies are characterized by frontal bossing; malar hypoplasia; a flattened nasal
bridge; recessed columella; thick, everted lips; wrinkled, hyperpigmented periorbital skin; and prominent, low-­set ears (Fig. 690.1).
The skin over the entire body is dry, finely wrinkled, and hypopigmented, often with a prominent venous pattern. Extensive peeling
of the skin is a clinical clue to diagnosis in the newborn period. The
paucity of sebaceous glands may account for the dry skin. The scalp
hair is sparse, fine, and lightly pigmented, and eyebrows and lashes
are sparse or absent. Other body hair is also sparse or absent. Sexual
hair growth is normal. Anodontia or hypodontia with widely spaced,
conical teeth is a consistent feature (see Fig. 690.1). Co-­management
with pediatric dentistry familiar with ectodermal dysplasias is critical
for oral health, nutrition, and maintenance of the facial bones. Otolaryngic and ophthalmologic abnormalities secondary to decreased
saliva and tear production are seen. The incidence of atopic diseases
in children with HED is high. Gastroesophageal reflux is common
and may play a role in failure to thrive, which is seen in 20% of

cases. Sexual development is usually normal. Historically, the infant
mortality rate has been 30%. Carrier females of X-­linked HED may
have no or less severe clinical manifestations.
Prenatal therapy of X-­linked HED with a recombinant protein
containing the EDA receptor binding domain has been successful
in three patients.
Hypohidrotic ED with immune deficiencies causes similar findings in sweating and hair and nail development, in association with
a dysgammaglobulinemia. Significant mortality is seen from recurrent infections. A variety of pathogenic variants of the genes encoding the tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα)–related signaling pathway
proteins—key in signal transduction from ectoderm to mesoderm
during development—are the molecular basis for this disorder (see
Table 690.2).
Treatment of children with HED includes protecting them from
exposure to high ambient temperatures. Early dental evaluation is necessary so that prostheses can be provided for cosmetic reasons and for
adequate nutrition. The use of artificial tears prevents damage to the
cornea in patients with defective lacrimation. Alopecia may necessitate
the wearing of a wig to improve appearance.

HIDROTIC ECTODERMAL DYSPLASIA (CLOUSTON
SYNDROME)

The salient features of the autosomal dominant disorder hidrotic ED are
dystrophic, hypoplastic, or absent nails; sparse hair; and hyperkeratosis
of the palms and soles (Table 690.3). Conjunctivitis and blepharitis are
common. The dentition and sweating are always normal. Absence of
eyebrows and eyelashes, clubbing of the fingers, and hyperpigmentation over the knees, elbows, and knuckles have been noted in some
affected individuals. Pathogenic variants in the GJB6 gene encoding
the gap junction protein connexin 30 are responsible for this disorder.
A similar disorder associated with deafness has been described with
pathogenic variants in the GJB2 gene encoding the connexin 26 protein. Pathogenic variants in GJB1 have also been implicated.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 690 u Ectodermal Dysplasias 4049

Fig. 690.1 Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia is characterized by pointed ears, fine hair, periorbital hyperpigmentation, midfacial hypoplasia, and
pegged teeth. (Courtesy the Fitzsimons Army Medical Center teaching file.)

Table 690.3  Common Ectodermal Dysplasias: Inheritance and Characteristic Clinical Findings
TYPE

INHERITANCE(S)

CHARACTERISTIC CLINICAL FINDINGS

Hypohidrotic ED

XLR, AD, AR

Distinctive facies: prominent forehead, thick lips and flattened nasal bridge; collodion-­like
membrane; eczema
Hypotrichosis of scalp and trunk, light/brittle/slow-­growing hair
Hypodontia, conical teeth
Hypohidrosis

Hypohidrotic ED-­
immune deficiency
(EDA-­ID)

XLR, AD

Seborrheic dermatitis–like rash, intertrigo
Hypotrichosis
Hypodontia, pointed teeth
Hypohidrosis/anhidrosis
Recurrent infections
Decreased immunoglobulin levels

Hidrotic ED (Clouston)

AD

Hyperpigmented skin over joints; palmoplantar keratoderma, conjunctivitis, blepharitis
Milky-­white nails in early childhood, nail dystrophy, clubbing
Sparse, wiry, brittle, pale scalp hair to total alopecia
Normal sweating

Witkop tooth and nail
syndrome

AD

Usually normal hair, rarely sparse or fine
Normal sweating
Small primary teeth, hypodontia causing lower lip eversion (“pouting lower lip”)
Thin, slow growing hypoplastic nails (toes > fingers), koilonychia

EEC

AD

Dry skin, aplasia or hypoplasia of skin
Normal sweating
Coarse, lightly pigmented hair; thick eyebrows
Hypodontia (reduced number), taurodontia, premature loss of teeth, dental enamel
abnormalities
Ectrodactyly more common than syndactyly
Nail dystrophy, transverse ridging and pitting
Corneal erosion, lacrimal duct abnormality, blepharitis, GU defects, cleft lip or palate
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4050 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 690.3  Common Ectodermal Dysplasias: Inheritance and Characteristic Clinical Findings—cont’d
TYPE

INHERITANCE(S)

CHARACTERISTIC CLINICAL FINDINGS

AEC (Hay-­Wells
syndrome) and RHS

AD

Erosive dermatitis, neonatal erythroderma (e.g., scalp, hands), dyspigmentation of skin
Coarse, wiry, lightly pigmented hair, patchy alopecia
± Hypohidrosis
Hypodontia, conical teeth
Nail absence or dystrophy with thickened nails
Ectrodactyly more common than syndactyly
Lacrimal duct abnormality, hearing loss, cleft lip/palate, ankyloblepharon, reflux

Limb-­mammary

AD

Normal hair
Hypodontia
± Hypohidrosis
Nail dystrophy
Ectrodactyly more common than syndactyly
Bifid uvula, hypoplastic nipples, joint contracture of hand, lacrimal duct atresia, cleft palate

ADULT

AD

Dry skin, photosensitivity, lentigines
Hypodontia, premature loss of teeth
Normal sweating
Pitting and longitudinal ridging of nails
Ectrodactyly and syndactyly
No cleft palate or lip
Hypoplastic nipples, lacrimal duct atresia,

AD, Autosomal dominant; ADULT, acro-­dermato-­ungal-­lacrimal-­tooth; AEC, ankyloblepharon-­ectodermal dysplasia-­clefting; AR, autosomal recessive; ED, ectodermal dysplasia; EEC,
ectrodactyly, ectodermal dysplasia, and cleft lip/palate syndrome; RHS, Rapp-­Hodgkin syndrome; XLR, X-­linked recessive.

Table 690.4  Disorders Associated with Decreased Sweat
Production

Chapter 691

CUTANEOUS LESIONS
Congenital absence of sweat glands without ectodermal dysplasia
Incontinentia pigmenti
Burns

Vascular Anomalies

MULTISYSTEM DISORDERS
Fabry disease
Crisponi syndrome
Chronic graft-­versus-­host disease
Sjögren syndrome
NEUROLOGIC DISORDERS
Spinal cord injury
Guillain-­Barré syndrome
Hereditary sensory autonomic neuropathy type I, II, IV
Complex regional pain syndrome
Multiple sclerosis
Multiple system atrophy
Ross syndrome
Shy-­Drager syndrome
MEDICATIONS
Anticholinergic drugs
Opioids
Botulism toxin
Clonidine
Barbiturate overdose
α2-­Receptor antagonists
OTHER
Idiopathic acquired generalized anhidrosis
Hypothyroidism
Conversion disorder
Heat shock
Sympathectomy

In addition to the EDs, other disorders are associated with absent or
decreased sweat production (Table 690.4).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Kari L. Martin
Nearly all vascular lesions of childhood may be divided into vascular
malformations and vascular tumors (Table 691.1). Vascular malformations are developmental disorders of blood vessel formation. Malformations do not regress, but slowly enlarge. They should be named after
the predominant vessel(s) forming the lesion: arterial, capillary, lymph,
venous, or combinations of these. Vascular tumors exhibit endothelial cell hyperplasia and proliferation. The International Society for the
Study of Vascular Anomalies (ISSVA) continues to update the classification structure for vascular disorders as new disorders are identified and as the biology and genetic causes for established disorders are
found. The complete classification, associated syndromes, and causative pathogenic variants can be found at www.issva.org.

VASCULAR MALFORMATIONS
Capillary Malformation (Port-­Wine Stain)

Capillary malformations (CMs) are present at birth. These vascular
malformations consist of mature dilated dermal capillaries. The lesions
are macular, sharply circumscribed, pink to purple, and tremendously
varied in size (Fig. 691.1). The head and neck region is the most common site of predilection; most lesions are unilateral. The mucous membranes can be involved. As a child matures into adulthood, the CM may
become darker in color and pebbly in consistency; it may occasionally
develop papules that bleed spontaneously. CM may occur in isolation
or in combination with other vessel malformations.
True CM should be distinguished from nevus simplex, which, in
contrast, is a relatively transient lesion often located in the midline (see
Chapter 688). When a CM is lateral and localized to the forehead and
upper eyelid, the diagnosis of Sturge-­Weber syndrome (glaucoma,
leptomeningeal venous angioma, seizures, hemiparesis contralateral
to the facial lesion, intracranial calcification) must be considered
(see Chapter 636.3). Early screening for glaucoma is important to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 691 u Vascular Anomalies
Table 691.1  Contemporary Classification of Vascular
Anomalies (ISSVA 2014 Classification)
VASCULAR TUMORS
Benign
Infantile hemangioma/hemangioma of infancy
Congenital hemangiomas (RICH, NICH, PICH)
Tufted angioma
Spindle cell hemangioma
Epithelioid hemangioma
Pyogenic granuloma
Locally Aggressive or Borderline
Kaposiform hemangioendothelioma
Retiform hemangioendothelioma
Papillary intralymphatic angioendothelioma (Dabska tumor)
Composite hemangioendothelioma
Kaposi sarcoma

4051

Table 691.2  Port-­Wine Stain–Associated Syndromes
• Sturge-­Weber syndrome
• Klippel-­Trenaunay syndrome
• Parkes-­Weber syndrome
• Phakomatosis pigmentovascularis
• Macrocephaly–capillary malformation (M-­CM) syndrome
• Capillary malformation–arteriovenous malformation (CM-­AVM)
syndrome
• Diffuse capillary malformation with overgrowth (DCMO)
• Bannayan-­Riley-­Ruvalcaba syndrome
• Von Hippel-­Lindau disease
• Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome
• Wyburn-­Mason syndrome
• Roberts syndrome
• Coat disease
Modified from Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed.
Elsevier: Philadelphia; 2022: Box 12.4, p. 347.

Malignant
Angiosarcoma
Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma
VASCULAR MALFORMATIONS
Simple
Capillary (CM) (e.g., port-­wine stain, telangiectasia, CMTC, salmon
patch/nevus simplex)
Venous (VM) (includes common, familial, glomuvenous, others)
Lymphatic (LM) (includes macrocystic, microcystic, primary
lymphedema, others)
Arteriovenous (AVM) and arteriovenous fistula (sporadic or
syndromal)
Combined
CM + VM, CM + LM, CM + AVM
LM + VM
CM + LM + VM
CM + LM + AVM, CM + VM + AVM
CM + LM + VM + AVM
Of major named vessels
Affect veins, arteries or lymphatics; usually of large caliber
Associated with other anomalies
Associated with anomalies of bone, soft tissue (usually overgrowth,
rarely undergrowth) or viscera
CMTC, Cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita; NICH, noninvoluting congenital
hemangioma; PICH, partially involuting congenital hemangioma; RICH, rapidly
involuting congenital hemangioma.
From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Box 12.1, p. 327. Created with data from Wassef M,
Blei F, Adams D, et al. Vascular anomalies classification: Recommendations from the
International Society for the Study of Vascular Anomalies. Pediatrics. 2015;136(1):e203–
e214.

Fig. 691.2 Nodular venous malformation on the leg of an adolescent.

prevent additional damage to the eye. CMs also occur as a component
of Klippel-­Trenaunay syndrome and with moderate frequency in
other syndromes, including megalencephaly, capillary malformation,
polymicrogyria (MCAP), Cobb (spinal arteriovenous malformation
[AVM], port-­wine stain), congenital lipomatous, overgrowth, vascular
malformations, epidermal nevi, skeletal anomalies (CLOVES), Proteus,
Beckwith-­Wiedemann, and Bonnet-­Dechaume-­Blanc syndromes, and
others (Table 691.2). In the absence of associated anomalies, morbidity from these lesions may include a poor self-­image, hypertrophy of
underlying structures, and traumatic bleeding.
The most effective treatment for CM is with the pulsed-­dye laser.
This therapy is targeted to hemoglobin within the lesion and minimizes
thermal injury to the surrounding normal tissue. After such treatment,
the texture and pigmentation of the skin are generally improved with
low risks of scarring. Therapy can begin in infancy when the surface
area of involvement is smaller. There may be advantages to treating
within the first year of life. Although this approach is quite effective,
redarkening of the stain may occur over time, making ongoing treatments useful. Camouflaging cosmetics may also be used.

Venous Malformation

Fig. 691.1 Capillary malformation. Pink macule on the cheek of an
infant.

Venous malformations include vein-­only malformations and combination malformations. Malformations consisting of veins only range
from nodules containing a mass of venules (Fig. 691.2) to diffuse large
vein abnormalities that may consist of either a superficial component
resembling varicose veins, deeper venous malformations, or both.
Most venous malformations are sporadic, although inherited forms
exist as well. Inherited forms and up to 40% of sporadic venous malformations are caused by TIE2 pathogenic variants. Treatment is reserved
for painful or symptomatic lesions. Surgical excision is best for small

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4052 Part XXIX u The Skin
or superficial nodular lesions; sclerotherapy or laser ablation is used
for larger, diffuse lesions. Localized intravascular coagulopathy can be
problematic in these lesions because of the chronic slow flow. This leads
to both painful thrombotic episodes and the risk of progression to systemic disseminated intravascular coagulopathy. Pulmonary embolus
has been reported in patients with large venous malformations.

LYMPHATIC MALFORMATIONS
See Chapter 538.

ARTERIOVENOUS MALFORMATION

AVMs are direct connections of artery to vein that bypass the capillary
bed (Fig. 691.3). AVMs of the skin are very rare. Skin changes are often
noted at birth, but they tend to be very subtle, presenting as a red-­pink
patch. Over time the lesions deepen in color and often result in thickening of the skin and surrounding tissue. They are diagnosed from their
obvious arterial palpation. Some AVMs are progressive and can lead to
significant morbidity and even mortality, so early diagnosis and evaluation by an experienced multidisciplinary team are essential.

KLIPPEL-­TRENAUNAY AND PARKES-­WEBER
SYNDROMES

Klippel-­Trenaunay syndrome is a term historically used to describe
complex mixed vascular malformation with overgrowth of bone and
soft tissue (Figs. 691.4 and 691.5). The anomaly is present at birth
and usually involves a lower limb but may involve more than one
limb, as well as portions of the trunk or face. Enlargement of the soft
tissues may be gradual and may involve the entire extremity, a portion of it, or selected digits. The vascular lesion most often is a capillary malformation, generally localized to the hypertrophied area. The
deep venous system may be absent or hypoplastic. Venous blebs and/

or vesicular lymphatic lesions may be present on the malformation’s
surface. Thick-­walled venous varicosities typically become apparent ipsilateral to the vascular malformation after the child begins
to ambulate. If there is an associated AVM, the disorder is called
Parkes-­Weber syndrome.
Somatic pathogenic activating variants in multiple genes have been
associated with vascular malformations and limb overgrowth (Fig.
691.6 and Table 691.3).
These disorders can be confused with Maffucci syndrome or, if
the surface vascular lesion is minimal, with Milroy disease. Pain,
limb swelling, and cellulitis may occur. Thrombophlebitis, dislocations of joints, hematuria secondary to angiomatous involvement of
the urinary tract, rectal bleeding from lesions of the gastrointestinal
tract, pulmonary lesions, and malformations of the lymphatic vessels are infrequent complications. MRI may delineate the extent of
the anomaly, but surgical correction or palliation is often difficult.
Sclerotherapy or endovenous laser ablation may be of benefit when
a venous component is the dominant vessel in the malformation.
The indications for radiologic studies of viscera and bones are best
determined by clinical evaluation. Supportive care includes compression bandages for varicosities; surgical treatment may help carefully selected patients. Leg-­length differences should be treated with
orthotic devices to prevent the development of spinal deformities.
Corrective bone surgery may eventually be needed to treat significant
leg-­length discrepancy.

Angiokeratoma Circumscriptum

Several forms of angiokeratoma have been described. Angiokeratomas are characterized by ectasia of superficial lymphatic vessels and
capillaries with hyperkeratosis of the overlying epidermis. Angiokeratoma circumscriptum is a rare disorder consisting of a solitary
lesion or multiple lesions that manifest as a plaque or plaques of
blue-­red crusted papules or nodules. The limbs are the sites of predilection. If therapy is desired, surgical excision is the treatment
of choice.

Cutis Marmorata Telangiectatica Congenita

Fig. 691.3 Arteriovenous malformation in conjunction with a port-­
wine stain of the scalp of a newborn.

Cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita, a benign vascular anomaly
apparent at birth, is composed of dilated superficial capillaries and
veins. Involved areas of skin have a reticulated red or purple hue that
resembles physiologic cutis marmorata but is more pronounced and
relatively unvarying (Fig. 691.7). The lesions may be restricted to a
single limb and a portion of the trunk or may be more widespread. The
lesions become more pronounced during changes in environmental
temperature, physical activity, or crying. In some cases, the underlying
subcutaneous tissue is atrophic, and ulceration may occur within the
reticulated bands. Rarely, defective growth of bone and other congenital abnormalities may be present. No specific therapy is indicated. Mild
vascular-­only cases may show gradual improvement. Cutis marmorata
telangiectatica congenita may be associated with CM, Adams-­Oliver
syndrome, patent ductus arteriosus, and a variety of other anomalies.
It must be differentiated from reticulate CM and physiologic cutis
marmorata.

Blue Rubber Bleb Nevus Syndrome

Fig. 691.4 Overgrowth of the right arm and hand in an adolescent
with Klippel-­Trenaunay syndrome.

Blue rubber bleb nevus is a rare syndrome consisting of numerous
venous malformations of the skin, mucous membranes, and gastrointestinal tract caused by somatic pathogenic variants in TEK in some
patients. Typical lesions are blue-­purple and rubbery in consistency;
they vary in size from a few millimeters to a few centimeters in diameter. They are sometimes painful or tender. The compressible nodules
may be present at birth but usually are progressive during childhood.
New lesions may continue to develop throughout life. Large disfiguring
and irregular blue marks may also occur. The lesions, which can rarely
be located in the liver, spleen, and central nervous system in addition
to the skin and gastrointestinal tract, do not involute spontaneously.
Recurrent gastrointestinal hemorrhage caused by lesions in the gastrointestinal tract may lead to severe anemia. Palliation can be achieved by
excision of involved bowel.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 691 u Vascular Anomalies

A

C

B

4053

D

Fig. 691.5 Parkes-­Weber syndrome. A, Three-­dimensional volume-­rendering CT angiography image of the limbs shows overgrowth of the right

limb (arrows) with an arterial blush adjacent to the posterior tibial artery (arrowhead), consistent with a high-­flow vascular malformation. B, Three-­
dimensional volume-­rendering CT angiography image of the limbs shows arterial blush adjacent to the posterior tibial artery (arrowhead). C, Coronal
CT angiography image of the limb shows arterial blush adjacent to the posterior tibial artery (arrowhead). D, Venous phase CT of the limb reveals
varicose veins in the right limb. (From Ufuk F. Limb overgrowth with vascular anomalies. J Pediatr. 2020;240:308–309, Fig, p. 309)
Ligand

Receptor
Plasma
membrane

P
D
K

PIP3
PI3K

PTEN

AKT

PIP2
PIK3CA related
• CLOVES
• Fibroadipose hyperplasia (FH)
• Fibroadipose infiltrating lipomatosis
• MCAP
• Hemihyperplasia multiple lipomatosis
(HHML)
• Macrodactyly
• Muscle hemihypertrophy
• Skin disorders including benign lichenoid
keratosis, epidermal nevi and seborrheic
keratosis
• Hemimegalencephaly

PTEN related
• Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba
syndrome
• Cowden syndrome
• Type II segmental Cowden
syndrome
• Lhermitte-Duclos disease

TSC2
TSC1

mTOR

Other effects

Cell survival
and growth

AKT related
• Proteus syndrome
• Megalencephaly polymicrogyria
polydactyly hydrocephalus (MPPH)
syndrome
• Lipodystrophy syndrome –
Hypoglycemia
• Hemimegalencephaly
• Focal cortical dysplasia
TSC1/2 related
• Tuberous sclerosis complex

mTOR related
• Hemimegalencephaly
• Focal cortical dysplasia

Apoptosis

Fig. 691.6 Simplified PIK3CA-­AKT-­mTOR pathway and associated clinical overgrowth disorders. PIP, Phosphatidylinositol polyphosphate; PTEN,
phosphatase and tensin homolog; PDK, phosphatidylinositol-­dependent kinase. (From Kang HC, Baek ST, Song S, Gleeson JG. Clinical and genetic
aspects of the segmental overgrowth spectrum due to somatic mutations in PIK3CA. J Pediatr. 2015;167[5]:957–962, Fig, p. 959)

PHAKOMATOSIS PIGMENTOVASCULARIS

Phakomatosis pigmentovascularis is a rare disorder characterized
by the association of a capillary malformation and melanocytic
lesions. Typically, the capillary malformation is extensive, and associated pigmentary lesions may include dermal melanocytosis, café-­
au-­lait macules, or a nevus spilus (speckled nevus). Nonpigmented

skin lesions that may occur in this setting include nevus anemicus
and epidermal nevi. Systemic anomalies are seen in rare cases.

NEVUS ANEMICUS

Although present at birth, nevus anemicus may not be detectable until
early childhood. The nevus consists of solitary or numerous sharply

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4054 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 691.3  Clinical Diagnostic Criteria for PIK3CA-­
Related Overgrowth Spectrum (PROS)
REQUIRED CRITERIA
1.	The presence of somatic PIK3CA pathogenic variant (if the
pathogenic variant cannot be defined, then the disease is
regarded as a presumptive PROS disorder)
2.	Congenital or early childhood onset
3.	Sporadic, without family history and mosaic distribution
4.	Affected patients can have one or more findings from category A
or B
CATEGORY A (MORE THAN 2
FEATURES)*

CATEGORY B (ISOLATED
FEATURES)

1.	Adipose, muscle, nerve, and
skeletal overgrowth
2.	Capillary, venous,
arteriovenous, and/or LMs
3.	Epidermal nevus

1.	Large, isolated LM
2.	Isolated macrodactyly,†
overgrown and splayed feet/
hands, or overgrown limbs
3.	Truncal adipose overgrowth
4.	Hemi- or bilateral dysplastic
megalencephaly or focal
cortical dysplasia type 2
5.	Epidermal nevus
6.	Seborrheic keratosis
7.	Benign lichenoid keratoses

*Typically progressive. Can manifest as scoliosis (kyphosis), limb overgrowth, central
nervous system (hydrocephalus, cerebellar tonsillar ectopia, Chiari, megalencephaly,
mega corpus callosum), regional lipomatous undergrowth with overgrowth,
infiltrating lipomatosis, or Wilms tumor/ovarian cystadenoma.
†Other terms include macrodystrophia lipomatosa, macrodactylia fibrolipomatosis, and
gigantism.
From Kang HC, Baek ST, Song S, Gleeson JG. Clinical and genetic aspects of the
segmental overgrowth spectrum due to somatic mutations in PIK3CA. J Pediatr.
2015;167(5):957–962, Table 1.

Fig. 691.7 Mottled pattern of cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita on the right hand.

delineated, pale macules or patches that are most often on the trunk
but may also occur on the neck or limbs. These nevi may simulate
plaques of vitiligo, leukoderma, or nevoid pigmentary defects, but they
can be readily distinguished because of their response to firm stroking.
Stroking evokes an erythematous line and flare in normal surrounding skin, but the skin of a nevus anemicus does not redden. They can
also be diagnosed by diascopy, in which pressure of the skin with a
glass slide will obscure the borders of a nevus anemicus. Although the
cutaneous vasculature appears normal histologically, the blood vessels within the nevus do not respond to injection of vasodilators. It has
been postulated that the persistent pallor may represent a sustained
localized adrenergic vasoconstriction.

VASCULAR TUMORS

Vascular tumors include infantile hemangiomas (IHs), tufted angiomas, kaposiform hemangioendotheliomas (KHEs), congenital hemangiomas, and additional more rare entities.

Infantile Hemangioma

IHs are proliferative benign vascular tumors of vascular endothelium
that may be present at birth or, more commonly, may become apparent in the first or second week of life, predictably enlarge, and then
spontaneously involute. IHs are the most common tumor of infancy,
occurring in 5% of newborns. Risk factors include prematurity, low
birthweight, female gender, and White race. IHs should be classified
as superficial, deep, or mixed (Fig. 691.8). The terms strawberry and
cavernous should not be used to describe hemangiomas. The immunohistochemical marker GLUT-­1 is specifically expressed in an IH,
which helps distinguish it histologically from other vascular anomalies. Superficial IHs are bright red, protuberant, compressible, sharply
demarcated lesions that may occur on any area of the body (Fig. 691.9,
see also Fig. 691.8). Although sometimes present at birth, they more
often appear in the first or second month of life and are heralded by
an erythematous or blue mark or an area of pallor, which subsequently
develops a fine telangiectatic pattern before the growth phase (see Fig.
691.9). The presenting sign may occasionally be an ulceration of the
perineum or lip. Favored sites are the face, scalp, back, and anterior
chest; lesions may be solitary or multiple. Patterns of facial involvement include frontotemporal, maxillary, mandibular, and frontonasal
regions. IHs that are more deeply situated are more diffuse and are less
defined than superficial IHs. The lesions are cystic, firm, or compressible, and the overlying skin may appear normal in color or may have a
bluish hue (Fig. 691.10).
Most IHs are mixed, having both superficial and deep components.
IHs undergo a phase of rapid expansion, followed by a stationary period
and finally by spontaneous involution (Fig. 691.11). Regression may
be anticipated when the lesion develops pale gray areas centrally. The
course of a particular lesion is unpredictable, but approximately 60% of
these lesions reach maximal involution by 5 years of age and 90–95%
by 9 years. Spontaneous involution cannot be correlated with size or
site of involvement, but lip lesions seem to persist most often. Complications include impairment of a vital function, ulceration, secondary
infection, and permanent disfigurement. The location of a lesion may
interfere with a vital function (e.g., on an eyelid interfering with vision,
on the urethra with urination, on the airway with respiration). IHs in a
“beard” distribution may be associated with upper airway or subglottic
involvement. Stridor should suggest a tracheobronchial lesion. Large
visceral (hepatic) IHs may be complicated by coexistent hypothyroidism because of type 3 iodothyronine deiodinase; symptoms may be
difficult to detect in this age-­group. Table 691.4 lists other concerning
features.
In the usual patient with an IH who has no serious complications or
extensive growth resulting in tissue destruction and severe disfigurement,
treatment consists of expectant observation. Because almost all lesions
regress spontaneously, therapy is rarely indicated. Parents require repeated
reassurance and support. After spontaneous involution, many patients
are left with small cosmetic defects, such as telangiectasia, hypopigmentation, fibrofatty deposits, and scars if the lesion has ulcerated. Residual
telangiectasias may be treated with pulsed dye laser therapy. Other defects
can be treated or minimized by judicious surgical repair if desired.
In the rare case in which intervention is required, topical timolol
solution (1 drop of 0.5% gel-­forming solution applied twice each day)
is effective, especially in small, superficial, nonulcerating, and nonmucosal IH. Topical timolol treatment is a very safe alternative to observation alone for a superficial IH. Timolol solution may also be used with
caution in the treatment of an ulcerated IH, with or without occlusion.
In a disfiguring, life-­or vision-­threatening, or ulcerated IH that is
not responding to other treatment, oral propranolol is the first-­line
treatment. IHs typically respond with growth arrest and often early
signs of involution within a couple of weeks of treatment initiation.
Dosing varies ranging from 1 to 3 mg/kg/day, though best outcomes
occur at 3 mg/kg/day with no increase in side effects. Some recommend inpatient initiation of propranolol for infants younger than 8
weeks gestational age or those with comorbid conditions. The dose
is initiated at 1 mg/kg/day divided into three doses with heart rate
and blood pressure monitoring at 1 and 2 hours after each dose. If
that dose is tolerated, the dose is increased to 2 mg/kg/day divided

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 691 u Vascular Anomalies

A

4055

C

B

Fig. 691.8 Types of infantile hemangiomas according to anatomic location. A, Bright red, superficial hemangioma. B, Bluish, deep hemangioma.
C, Mixed type. (From Léaute-­Labréze C, Harper JI, Hieger PH. Infantile haemangioma. Lancet. 2017;390:85–94, Fig. 4, p. 88.)

A

Fig. 691.10 Deep infantile hemangioma of the chest.

B

A

B

C
Fig. 691.9 Precursor lesions of infantile hemangioma. Figure shows a

Fig. 691.11 Spontaneous regression of infantile hemangioma. A, He-

into three doses. The outpatient initiation assumes good social
support and access to the hospital. The initial dose and monitoring are similar to the inpatient plan; if the dose is tolerated for 3-­7
days, the dose is increased to 1.5 mg/kg/day. If the latter dose is

tolerated after 3-­7 days, the dose is increased to 2 mg/kg/day. In all
situations, propranolol must be given a minimum of 6 hours after
the last dose. Risks of propranolol treatment include hypoglycemia, bradycardia, hypotension, gastroesophageal reflux disease or

sharply demarcated, so-­called anemic spot on the left shoulder. A, Day
3. B, Day 21. C, Day 90. (From Léaute-­Labréze C, Harper JI, Hieger PH.
Infantile haemangioma. Lancet. 2017;390:85–94, Fig. 3, p. 87.)

mangioma on right lower arm, age 14 wk. B, Residual telangiectasia
at age 23 mo. (From Léaute-­Labréze C, Harper JI, Hieger PH. Infantile
haemangioma. Lancet. 2017;390:85–94, Fig. 5, p. 88.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4056 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 691.4  Clinical “Red Flags” Associated with
Hemangiomas
CLINICAL FINDING

RECOMMENDED EVALUATION

Facial hemangioma
involving significant
area of face (>5 cm)

Evaluate for PHACES (posterior fossa
abnormalities, hemangioma, and
arterial, cardiac, eye, and sternal
abnormalities):
MRI and MRA of brain, neck, orbit
Cardiac, ophthalmologic evaluation
Evaluate for midline abnormality:
supraumbilical raphe, sternal atresia,
cleft palate, thyroid abnormality

Cutaneous hemangiomas
in beard distribution

Evaluate for airway hemangioma,
especially if manifesting with stridor

Periocular hemangioma

MRI of orbit
Ophthalmologic evaluation

Paraspinal midline
vascular lesion

Ultrasonography or MRI to evaluate for
occult spinal dysraphism

Multifocal infantile
hemangiomas (>5 cm)

Evaluate for parenchymal hemangiomas,
especially hepatic/central nervous
system
Guaiac stool test, liver ultrasound

Large hemangioma,
especially hepatic

Ultrasonography with Doppler flow study

Consider cardiac evaluation and
echocardiography to rule out diastolic
reversal of flow in aorta
MRI to evaluate extent and flow
characteristics

Perineal segmental
hemangioma

2-­mo-­old infant with definite PHACE. (From Garzon MC, Epstein LG,
Heyer GL, et al. PHACE syndrome: consensus-­derived diagnosis and
care recommendations. J Pediatr. 2016;178:24–33, Fig. 1, p. 25.)

MRI
TSH to detect associated hypothyroidism

Thrill and/or bruit
associated with
hemangioma

Fig. 691.12 Large segmental infantile hemangioma of the face in a

MRI of spine, kidneys to detect
LUMBAR/PELVIS/SACRAL syndrome

LUMBAR, Lower body infantile hemangiomas and other skin defects, urogenital
anomalies and ulceration, myelopathy, bony deformities, anorectal malformations
and arterial anomalies, renal anomalies; PELVIS, perineal hemangioma, external
genital malformations, lipomyelomeningocele, vesicorenal anomalies, imperforate
anus, skin tag; SACRAL, spinal dysraphism, anogenital anomalies, cutaneous
anomalies, renal/urologic anomalies, angioma in lumbosacral location.
Modified from Blei F. Vascular anomalies: from bedside to bench and back again. Curr
Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health. 2002;32:67–102.

of these therapies has become less necessary since the introduction of
propranolol.
In patients with large segmental IH of the face, PHACES syndrome should be considered (Fig. 691.12 and Table 691.5). PHACES
stands for posterior fossa brain defects such as Dandy-­Walker malformation or cerebellar hypoplasia, large segmental facial infantile
hemangioma, arterial cerebrovascular abnormalities such as aneurysms and stroke, coarctation of the aorta, and eye abnormalities.
Sternal raphe defects such as pits, scars, or supraumbilical raphe are
infrequently observed. Evaluation of children at risk for PHACES is
important both to detect any underlying abnormalities and before
starting systemic therapy, which may be indicated given the size and
location of the IH typically associated with this syndrome. PHACES
children with cervical and intracranial arterial abnormalities are at
increased risk of cerebrovascular accidents, and specialized care by
an experienced multidisciplinary team is essential.

Multifocal Infantile Hemangioma
worsening of existing disease, hyperkalemia, and bronchospasm/
wheezing. Nonetheless, reports of side effects of propranolol used
for IH treatment are rare. Increased propranolol levels occur with
inhibitors of CYP2D6 (cimetidine, amiodarone, fluoxetine, quinidine, ritonavir) and CPY1A2 (cimetidine, ciprofloxacin, isoniazid,
ritonavir, theophylline); decreased blood levels occur with inducers
of hepatic drug metabolism (rifampin, phenytoin, phenobarbital).
In patients unable to tolerate propranolol, or if the IH has not
responded after a couple of weeks of treatment, systemic oral
corticosteroids may be used. Termination of growth and sometimes regression may be evident after 2-­4 weeks of therapy. When
a response is obtained, the dose should be decreased gradually,
though most patients will require treatment until about 1 year of
age.
Intralesional corticosteroid injection by an experienced physician
can also induce rapid involution of a localized IH but has risks of ulceration, tissue atrophy, and blindness if used near the orbit. Vincristine is
used by some oncologists to treat significant IH. Interferon-­α therapy
may also be effective, but spastic diplegia is seen in 10% of cases. Use

Diffuse neonatal hemangiomatosis (or benign neonatal hemangiomatosis) is a historical term to describe a condition in which
numerous or multifocal vascular lesions are widely distributed (Fig.
691.13). Several distinct diagnoses have been previously lumped
together under this clinical phenotype with mortality cited as high
as 60–80%. Upon further analysis, this group of disorders has been
found to comprise several distinct entities, which are important to
distinguish from one another, given their varying prognoses and
management strategies. Therefore the term multifocal IH is more
accurate and leads to correct treatments and prognosis for these
patients with more than one cutaneous (and/or visceral) IH.
Multifocal IHs may occur in the skin and visceral organs, but
remain GLUT-­1–positive when biopsied, have a relatively good
prognosis with low morbidity, and respond to systemic propranolol
just as solitary cutaneous IH. Patients with more than five cutaneous IH should undergo an abdominal physical exam and possibly
liver ultrasound to detect liver IH, which can grow quite large (Fig.
691.14).
Multifocal lymphangioendotheliomatosis (also known as cutaneovisceral angiomatosis) also presents with many vascular tumors in the
skin and visceral organs but is GLUT-­1–negative and complicated by

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 691 u Vascular Anomalies

4057

Table 691.5  PHACES Diagnostic Criteria: Revised
ORGAN SYSTEMS

MAJOR CRITERIA

MINOR CRITERIA

Arterial anomalies

Anomaly of major cerebral or cervical arteries*
Dysplasia† of the large cerebral arteries
Arterial stenosis or occlusion with or without moyamoya collaterals
Absence or moderate-­severe hypoplasia of the large cerebral and
cervical arteries
Aberrant origin or course of the large cerebral or cervical arteries
except common arch variants such as bovine arch
Persistent carotid-­vertebrobasilar anastomosis (proatlantal
segmental, hypoglossal, otic, and/or trigeminal arteries)

Aneurysm of any of the cerebral arteries

Structural brain

Posterior fossa brain anomalies
Dandy-­Walker complex
Other hypoplasia/dysplasia of the mid and/or hind brain

Midline brain anomalies
Malformation of cortical development

Cardiovascular

Aortic arch anomalies
Coarctation of the aorta
Dysplasia*
Aneurysm
Aberrant origin of the subclavian artery with or without a vascular
ring

Ventricular septal defect
Right aortic arch/double aortic arch
Systemic venous anomalies

Ocular

Posterior segment abnormalities
Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
Persistent fetal vasculature
Retinal vascular anomalies
Morning glory disc anomaly
Optic nerve hypoplasia
Peripapillary staphyloma

Anterior segment abnormalities
Microphthalmia
Sclerocornea
Coloboma
Cataracts

Ventral/midline

Anomaly of the midline chest and abdomen
• Sternal defect
• Sternal pit
• Sternal cleft
• Supraumbilical raphe

Ectopic thyroid hypopituitarism
Midline sternal papule/hamartoma

DEFINITE PHACE
Hemangioma >5 cm in diameter of the head including scalp PLUS one
major criteria or two minor criteria
POSSIBLE PHACE
Hemangioma >5 cm in diameter of the head
including scalp
PLUS one minor criteria

Hemangioma of the neck, upper trunk, or trunk and proximal upper
extremity
PLUS two major criteria

Hemangioma of the neck, upper trunk, or
trunk and proximal upper extremity
PLUS one major or two minor criteria

No hemangioma
PLUS two major criteria

*Internal carotid artery, middle cerebral artery, anterior cerebral artery, posterior cerebral artery, or vertebrobasilar system.
†Includes kinking, looping, tortuosity, and/or dolichoectasia.

From Garzon MC, Epstein LG, Heyer GL, et al. PHACE syndrome: consensus-­derived diagnosis and care recommendations. J Pediatr. 2016;178:24–33, Table II.

severe thrombocytopenia and gastrointestinal bleeding with high mortality. Accurate diagnosis in patients who present with multifocal vascular tumors is critical so early, appropriate management may be initiated.

Congenital Hemangioma

Congenital hemangiomas are benign vascular tumors that are present typically at birth. They are most often red or blue hued with
telangiectasia and may have a ring of pallor. They do not undergo
further growth after delivery as IHs do. Changes after delivery occur
along a spectrum, and the lesion may stay stable (noninvoluting
congenital hemangiomas [NICH]), partially involute (partially
involuting congenital hemangiomas [PICH]), or decrease rapidly
in size, leaving fibrofatty residual tissue behind (rapidly involuting
congenital hemangiomas [RICH]). They are distinguishable from
IH because of their clinical course and negative GLUT-­1 markers on
histopathology. It is also important to note the difference because
CH do not respond to propranolol.

Kaposiform Hemangioendothelioma

KHE is a rare and potentially life-­threatening vascular tumor. KHE
classically presents as a red to purple firm plaque on the lateral neck,
axilla, trunk, or extremities. Visceral tumors occur as well. Lesions may
occasionally get smaller over time but rarely resolve completely. Tufted
angioma, once thought to be a separate tumor on the same clinical
spectrum as KHE, is considered under the umbrella term of KHE (Fig.
691.15). The main complication of these tumors is the development of
Kasabach-­Merritt phenomenon (KMP), which may be fatal; therefore
early diagnosis and treatment are important. Oral sirolimus may be
helpful to stabilize and sometimes shrink these tumors. Retroperitoneal or intrathoracic lesions in the absence of cutaneous lesions are
uncommon but are often associated with KMP.

Kasabach-­Merritt Phenomenon

KMP is a life-­threatening combination of a rapidly enlarging KHE,
thrombocytopenia, microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, and an acute

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4058 Part XXIX u The Skin
or chronic consumption coagulopathy. The clinical manifestations
are usually evident during early infancy. The vascular lesion is usually
cutaneous and is only rarely located in viscera. The associated thrombocytopenia may lead to precipitous hemorrhage accompanied by
ecchymoses, petechiae, and a rapid increase in the size of the vascular
lesion. Severe anemia from hemorrhage or microangiopathic hemolysis may ensue. Thrombocytopenia is present, but the bone marrow contains increased numbers of normal or immature megakaryocytes. The

thrombocytopenia has been attributed to sequestration or increased
destruction of platelets within the lesion. Hypofibrinogenemia and
decreased levels of consumable clotting factors are relatively common
(see Chapter 533.6).
Treatment includes surgical excision of small lesions, although
this is often difficult because of coagulopathy. Additional pharmacologic treatments include systemic steroids with or without
vincristine as first-­line therapy in most cases. Antiplatelet, antifibrinolytic, and other chemotherapeutic agents have been used
with mixed results. Initial studies of sirolimus therapy have been
promising. The mortality rate overall once patients have KMP is
significant.

Pyogenic Granuloma (Lobular Capillary Hemangioma)

A pyogenic granuloma (PG) is a small, red, glistening, sessile, or
pedunculated papule that often has a discernible epithelial collarette
(Fig. 691.16). The surface may be weeping and crusted or completely
epithelialized. PGs initially grow rapidly, may ulcerate, and bleed easily

Fig. 691.13 Multifocal cutaneous and systemic (liver) infantile hemangiomas. (From Eichenfield LF, Frieden IJ, Esterly NB. Textbook of Neonatal Dermatology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2008:359.)

Fig. 691.15 Nodular tufted angioma on the left thigh.

A

B

C

Fig. 691.14 Multifocal infantile hemangioma. A, Multiple hypoechoic lesions (arrowheads). B, Arteriovenous shunting on ultrasound. C, Multiple

hypervascular masses in the liver on computed tomography (arrowheads). (From Uda K, Okubo Y, Matushima T, et al. Multifocal infantile hemangioma. J Pediatr. 2019;210:238, Fig. 2, p. 238.e1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 691 u Vascular Anomalies

4059

Fig. 691.18 Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. Telangiectases
Fig. 691.16 Pyogenic granuloma on the left cheek.

are found on the lips, oral mucosa, nasal mucosa, skin, and conjunctiva. Epistaxis is the most common manifestation of the disease. Blood
transfusions may be required. (From Habif TP. Clinical Dermatology: A
Color Guide to Diagnosis and Therapy, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby;
2004: Fig. 23.22, p. 831.)

blanching; pulsations visible in larger nevi are evidence for the arterial source of the lesion. Spider angiomas are associated with conditions in which there are increased levels of circulating estrogens,
such as cirrhosis and pregnancy, but they also occur in up to 15%
of normal preschool-­age children and 45% of school-­age children.
Sites of predilection in children are the dorsum of the hand, forearm, nose, infraocular region, lips, and ears. Lesions often regress
spontaneously after puberty. If removal is desired, pulsed dye laser
therapy is the mode of choice; resolution is achieved in 90% of cases
with a single treatment.

Maffucci Syndrome
Fig. 691.17 Spider angioma with visible central arteriole component.

when traumatized because they consist of exuberant granulation tissue.
They are relatively common in children, particularly on the face, arms,
and hands. Such a lesion located on a finger or hand may appear as a
subcutaneous nodule. PGs may arise at sites of injury, but a history of
trauma often cannot be elicited.
PGs are benign but a nuisance because they bleed easily with trauma
and may recur if incompletely removed. Numerous satellite papules
have developed after surgical excision of PGs from the back, particularly in the interscapular region. Small lesions may regress after
cauterization with silver nitrate; larger lesions require excision and
electrodesiccation of the base of the granuloma. Small (<5 mm) lesions
may be treated successfully with pulsed dye laser therapy.

Angiokeratoma of Mibelli

Angiokeratoma of Mibelli is characterized by 1-­to 8-­mm red, purple,
or black scaly, verrucous, occasionally crusted papules and nodules
that appear on the dorsum of the fingers and toes and on the knees and
the elbows. Less commonly, palms, soles, and ears may be affected. In
many patients, onset has followed frostbite or chilblains. These nodules
bleed freely after injury and may involute in response to trauma. They
may be effectively eradicated by cryotherapy, electrofulguration, excision, or laser ablation.

Spider Angioma

A vascular spider (nevus araneus) consists of a central feeder artery
with many dilated radiating vessels and a surrounding erythematous flush, varying from a few millimeters to several centimeters
in diameter (Fig. 691.17). Pressure over the central vessel causes

The association of spindle cell hemangiomas with nodular enchondromas in the metaphyseal or diaphyseal cartilaginous portion of long
bones is known as Maffucci syndrome. Maffucci syndrome is caused
by somatic mosaic pathogenic variants in the IDH1 and IDH2 genes.
Vascular lesions are typically soft, compressible, asymptomatic, blue to
purple subcutaneous masses that grow in proportion to a child’s growth
and stabilize by adulthood. Mucous membranes or viscera may also be
involved. Onset occurs during childhood. Bone lesions may produce
limb deformities and pathologic fractures. Malignant transformation
of enchondromas (chondrosarcoma, angiosarcoma) or primary malignancies (ovarian, fibrosarcoma, glioma, pancreatic) may be a complication (see Chapter 550).

Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia (Osler-­Weber-­
Rendu Disease)

Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT), which is inherited
as an autosomal dominant trait, occurs in two types. The gene in
HHT-­1 encodes ENG, a membrane glycoprotein on endothelial
cells that binds transforming growth factor-­β. HHT-­2 is caused
by pathogenic variants in the ACVRL1 gene and is associated with
increased risk for hepatic involvement and pulmonary hypertension. HHT-­juvenile polyposis syndrome is caused by a pathogenic
variant in SMAD4.
Affected children usually experience recurrent epistaxis before
detection of the characteristic skin and mucous membrane lesions.
The mucocutaneous lesions, which usually develop at puberty, are
1-­to 4-­mm, sharply demarcated, red to purple macules, papules, or
spider-­like projections, each composed of a tightly woven mat of
tortuous telangiectatic vessels (Fig. 691.18). The nasal mucosa, lips,
and tongue are usually involved; less commonly, cutaneous lesions
occur on the face, ears, palms, and nail beds. Vascular ectasias may
also arise in the conjunctivae, larynx, pharynx, gastrointestinal
tract, bladder, vagina, bronchi, brain, and liver. Diagnostic criteria include spontaneous recurrent epistaxis, telangiectasias (oral,
nose, fingers), visceral lesions (gastrointestinal telangiectasias,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4060 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 691.19 Chest multislice spiral CT in a pa-

A

B

C

tient showing a large pulmonary arteriovenous
malformation in the posterior segment of right
upper lobe (arrowhead). A, Axial maximum intensity projection image. B, Coronal maximum
intensity projection image. C, Three-­dimensional
volume rendering. (From Giordano P, Lenato GM,
Suppressa P, et al. Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia: arteriovenous malformations in children. J Pediatr. 2013;163:179–186, Fig. 1, p. 182.)

characterized by multiple atypical-­appearing macules or patches that
are present at birth, suggestive of microcutaneous AVMs that look like
capillary malformations (Fig. 691.20). Lesions that are present at birth
will enlarge and darken with increasing age. Some lesions have peripheral pallor (halo effect). In addition, associated high-­flow AVMs may
be present in the brain, spinal cord, or skin. Arteriovenous fistulas have
also been reported. Pulse dye laser treatment may be effective for cutaneous lesions, whereas embolization is indicated for AVMs.

Ataxia-­Telangiectasia

Fig. 691.20 Infant with CM-­AVM syndrome and a typical-­appearing

CM-­AVM stain of the left chest. This lesion demonstrates high flow on
Doppler evaluation, differentiating it from classic CM. In CM-­AVM syndrome, the lesions tend to be multifocal, with more arising over time.
(From Eichenfield LF, Frieden IJ, eds. Neonatal and Infant Dermatology,
3rd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015: Fig. 22.14, p. 363.)

pulmonary or hepatic or cerebral AVMs), and first-­degree relative
with HHT.
Massive hemorrhage is the most serious complication of HHT and
may result in severe anemia. Bleeding may occur from the nose, mouth,
gastrointestinal tract, genitourinary tract, or lungs; epistaxis is often the
only complaint, occurring in 80% of patients. Approximately 15–20%
of patients with AVMs in the lungs present with stroke due to embolic
abscesses (Fig. 691.19). Hepatic encephalopathy in the presence of normal liver function may occur with a hepatic AVM. Persons with HHT
have normal levels of clotting factors and an intact clotting mechanism.
In the absence of serious complications, the life span of a person with
HHT is normal. Local lesions may be ablated temporarily with chemical cautery or electrocoagulation. More drastic surgical measures may
be required for lesions in critical sites, such as the lung or gastrointestinal tract. Bevacizumab, an anti–vascular endothelial growth factor
agent, has been effective in treating affected patients with HHT who
have high cardiac output secondary to hepatic AVMs. The nasal spray
form of bevacizumab may be beneficial therapy for epistaxis.

Capillary Malformation–Arteriovenous Malformation
Syndrome (CM-­AVM)

CM-­AVM is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by pathogenic
variants in RASA1 (CM-­AVM-­1) or EPHB4 (CM-­AVM-­2) and is

See Chapter 637.1.
Ataxia-­telangiectasia is transmitted as an autosomal recessive trait
because of a pathogenic variant in the ATM gene. The characteristic
telangiectasias develop at approximately 3 years of age, first on the bulbar conjunctivae and later on the nasal bridge, malar areas, external
ears, hard palate, upper anterior chest, and antecubital and popliteal
fossae. Additional cutaneous stigmata include café-­au-­lait spots, premature graying of the hair, and sclerodermatous changes. Progressive
cerebellar ataxia, neurologic deterioration, sinopulmonary infections,
and malignancies are also seen.

Angiokeratoma Corporis Diffusum (Fabry Disease)

See Chapter 106.4.
An inborn error of glycolipid metabolism (α-­galactosidase),
angiokeratoma corporis diffusum is an X-­linked recessive disorder that is fully penetrant in males and is of variable penetrance in
carrier females. Angiokeratomas appear before puberty and occur
in profusion over the genitalia, hips, buttocks, and thighs and in
the umbilical and inguinal regions. They consist of 0.1-­to 3.0-­mm,
red to blue-­black papules that may have a hyperkeratotic surface.
Telangiectasias are seen in the mucosa and conjunctiva. On light
microscopy, these angiokeratomas appear as blood-­filled, dilated,
endothelium-­
lined vascular spaces. Granular lipid deposits are
demonstrable in dermal macrophages, fibrocytes, and endothelial
cells.
Additional clinical manifestations include recurrent episodes of
fever and agonizing pain, cyanosis and flushing of the acral limb areas,
paresthesias of the hands and feet, corneal opacities detectable on slit-­
lamp examination, and hypohidrosis. Renal involvement and cardiac
involvement are the usual causes of death. The biochemical defect is a
deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme α-­galactosidase, with accumulation
of ceramide trihexoside in tissues, particularly vascular endothelium,
and excretion in urine (see Chapter 106.4 for therapy). Similar cutaneous lesions have also been described in another lysosomal enzyme
disorder, α-­l-­fucosidase deficiency, and in sialidosis, a storage disease
with neuraminidase deficiency.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 692 u Cutaneous Nevi

4061

Cutaneous Nevi

scalp (Fig. 692.1). Consideration should be given to the presence of risk
factors for development of melanoma and the patient’s parents’ wishes
about removal of the nevus. If doubt remains about the benign nature
of a nevus, excision is a safe and simple outpatient procedure that may
be justified to allay anxiety.

Kari L. Martin

ATYPICAL MELANOCYTIC NEVUS

Chapter 692

Nevus skin lesions are characterized histopathologically by collections
of well-­differentiated cell types normally found in the skin. Vascular
nevi are described in Chapter 691. Melanocytic nevi are subdivided
into two broad categories: those that appear after birth (acquired nevi)
and those that are present at birth (congenital nevi).

ACQUIRED MELANOCYTIC NEVUS

Melanocytic nevi are benign clusters of melanocytic nevus cells that
arise as a result of alteration and proliferation of melanocytes at the
epidermal-­dermal junction.

Epidemiology

The number of acquired melanocytic nevi increases gradually during
childhood and more slowly in early adulthood. The number reaches a
plateau in the third or fourth decade and then slowly decreases thereafter. The mean number of melanocytic nevi in an adult varies depending on genetics, skin color, and sun exposure. The greater the number
of nevi present, the greater the risk for development of melanoma,
though the majority of melanomas arise de novo. Sun exposure during
childhood, particularly intermittent, intense exposure of an individual
with light skin, and a propensity to burn and freckle rather than tan
are important determinants of the number of melanocytic nevi that
develop. Red-­haired children, despite their light skin and propensity
to freckle and sunburn, have fewer nevi than other children. Increased
numbers of nevi are also associated with immunosuppression and
administration of chemotherapy.

Clinical Manifestations

Melanocytic nevi have a well-­defined life history and are classified as
junctional, compound, or dermal in accordance with the location of
the nevus cells in the skin. In childhood, >90% of nevi are junctional;
melanocyte proliferation occurs at the junction of the epidermis and
dermis to form nests of cells. Junctional nevi appear anywhere on the
body in various shades of brown; they are relatively small, discrete, flat,
and variable in shape. Although some nevi, particularly those on the
palms, soles, and genitalia, remain junctional throughout life, most
become compound as melanocytes migrate into the papillary dermis
to form nests at both the epidermal-­dermal junction and within the
dermis. If the junctional melanocytes stop proliferating, nests of melanocytes remain only within the dermis, forming an intradermal nevus.
With maturation, compound and intradermal nevi may become raised,
dome-­shaped, verrucous, or pedunculated. Slightly elevated lesions are
usually compound. Distinctly elevated lesions are usually intradermal.
With age, the dermal melanocytic nests regress and nevi gradually
disappear.

Atypical melanocytic nevi occur both in an autosomal dominant familial melanoma-­prone setting (familial mole–melanoma syndrome, dysplastic nevus syndrome, BK mole syndrome) and as a sporadic event.
Only 2% of all pediatric melanomas occur in individuals with a familial
syndrome; melanoma develops before age 20 years in 10% of individuals with the syndrome. Malignant melanoma has been reported in children with dysplastic nevus syndrome as young as 10 years old. Risk
for development of melanoma is essentially 100% in individuals with
dysplastic nevus syndrome who have two family members who have
had melanomas. The term atypical mole syndrome describes lesions in
those individuals without an autosomal dominant familial history of
melanoma but with more than 50 nevi, some of which are atypical.
The lifetime risk of melanoma associated with dysplastic nevi in this
context is estimated to be 5–10%.
Atypical nevi tend to be large (5-­15 mm) and round to oval. They
have irregular margins and variegated color, and portions of them are
elevated. These nevi are most common on the posterior trunk, suggesting that intermittent, intense sun exposure has a role in their genesis.
They may also occur in sun-­protected areas such as the breasts, buttocks, and scalp. Atypical nevi do not usually develop until puberty,
although scalp lesions may be present earlier. Atypical nevi demonstrate disordered proliferation of atypical intraepidermal melanocytes,
lymphocytic infiltration, fibroplasia, and angiogenesis. It may be helpful to obtain histopathologic documentation of dysplastic change by
biopsy to identify these individuals. It is prudent to excise borderline
atypical nevi in immunocompromised children or in those treated
with irradiation or chemotherapeutic agents. Although chemotherapy
is associated with the development of a greater number of melanocytic
nevi, it has not been directly linked to increased risk for development
of melanoma. The threshold for removal of clinically atypical nevi is
also lower at sites that are difficult to observe, such as the scalp. Children with atypical nevi should undergo a complete skin examination
every 6-­12 months. In these children, photographic mole mapping
serves as a useful adjunct in following nevus change. Parents must be
counseled about the importance of sun protection and avoidance and
should be instructed to look for early signs of melanoma on a regular
basis, approximately every 3-­4 months.

CONGENITAL MELANOCYTIC NEVUS

Congenital melanocytic nevi are present in 2–3% of newborn infants.
These nevi have been categorized by size: giant congenital nevi are
>40 cm in diameter (adult size) or >5% of the body surface; large nevi
are 20-­40 cm, medium nevi are 1.5-­20 cm, and small nevi are <1.5
cm in diameter (Fig. 692.2). Congenital nevi are characterized by the

Prognosis and Treatment

Acquired pigmented nevi are benign, but a very small percentage
undergo malignant transformation. Suspicious changes are indications for excision and histopathologic evaluation. This includes rapid
increase in size; unusual colors such as red, black, varying shades of
brown, gray, and white; bleeding; textures such as scaling, erosion,
ulceration, and induration; and regional lymphadenopathy. Most of
these changes are from irritation, infection, or maturation; darkening
and gradual increase in size and elevation normally occur during adolescence and should not be cause for concern. Two common benign
changes are clonal nevi (fried-­egg moles) and eclipse nevi. A clonal
nevus is light brown with a dark, raised center representing a clonal
change of a subset of nevus cells within the lesion. Eclipse nevi are flat
and light brown with dark brown rims. They are seen primarily in the

Fig. 692.1 Eclipse nevi (rim moles) in the scalp.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4062 Part XXIX u The Skin

A
Fig. 692.3 “Bathing suit” large congenital melanocytic nevus.

B
Fig. 692.2 Congenital melanocytic nevus. Changing appearance
with time of a congenital melanocytic nevus of small-­to-­medium size
on the trunk when the patient was 9 months old (A) and 10 years old
(B). (From Anderson-­Vildosola J, Hernandez-­Martin A. Addressing frequently asked questions and dispelling myths about melanocytic nevi
in children. Dermatol Clin. 2022;40:51–59, Fig. 5)

presence of nevus cells in the lower reticular dermis; between collagen
bundles; surrounding cutaneous appendages, nerves, and vessels in the
lower dermis; and occasionally extending to the subcuticular fat. Large
and giant congenital nevi often harbor NRAS pathogenic variants, and
BRAF pathogenic variants typically seen in regular melanocytic nevi
are most common in small or medium congenital nevi. Identification is
often uncertain, however, because they may have the histologic features
of ordinary junctional, compound, or intradermal nevi. Some nevi that
were not present at birth display histopathologic features of congenital
nevi; these should not be considered congenital, but may be called congenital nevus–like nevi (CNLN). Furthermore, congenital nevi may be
difficult to distinguish clinically from other types of pigmented lesions,
adding to the difficulty that parents may have in identifying nevi that
were present at birth. The clinical differential diagnosis includes dermal
melanocytosis, café-­au-­lait macules, and smooth muscle hamartomas.
Sites of predilection for small congenital nevi are the lower trunk,
upper back, shoulders, chest, and proximal limbs. The lesions may
be flat, elevated, verrucous, or nodular and may be various shades of
brown, blue, or black. Given the difficulty in identifying small congenital nevi with certainty, data regarding their malignant potential
are controversial and likely overstated. The true incidence of melanoma in congenital nevi, especially small and medium-­sized lesions,
is unknown. Removal of all small congenital nevi is not warranted
because the development of melanoma in a small congenital nevus is
an exceedingly rare event before puberty. A number of factors must
be weighed in the decision about whether or not to remove a nevus,
including its location, the ability to monitor it clinically, the potential
for scarring, the presence of other risk factors for melanoma, and the
presence of atypical clinical features.
Giant congenital pigmented nevi (<1 in 20,000 births) occur most
commonly on the posterior trunk (Fig. 692.3) but may also appear on
the head or extremities. These nevi are of special significance because

of their association with leptomeningeal melanocytosis (neurocutaneous melanocytosis) and their predisposition for development of malignant melanoma.
Leptomeningeal involvement occurs most often when the nevus is
located on the head or midline on the trunk, particularly when associated with multiple “satellite” melanocytic nevi (>20 lesions). Nevus cells
within the leptomeninges and brain parenchyma may cause increased
intracranial pressure, hydrocephalus, seizures, intellectual disability,
and motor deficits and may result in melanoma. Malignancy can be
identified by careful cytologic examination of the cerebrospinal fluid
for melanin-­containing cells. MRI demonstrates asymptomatic leptomeningeal melanosis in 30% of individuals with giant congenital nevus
of the type described earlier. The overall incidence of malignant melanoma arising in a giant congenital nevus is 1–2%. The median age at
diagnosis of the melanomas that arise within a giant congenital nevus
is 7 years. The mortality rate approaches 100%. The risk of melanoma is
greater in patients in whom the predicted adult size of the nevus is >40
cm, lesions are on the trunk, and satellite lesions are present. Management of giant congenital nevi remains controversial and should involve
the parents, pediatrician, dermatologist, and plastic surgeon. If the
nevus lies over the head or spine, MRI may allow detection of neural
melanosis, the presence of which makes gross removal of a nevus from
the skin a futile effort. In the absence of neural melanosis, early excision and repair aided by tissue expanders or grafting may reduce the
burden of nevus cells and thus the potential for development of melanoma, but at the cost of many potentially disfiguring operations. Nevus
cells deep within subcutaneous tissues may evade excision. Random
biopsies of the nevus are not helpful, but biopsy of newly expanding
nodules is indicated. Follow-­up every 6 months for 5 years and every
12 months thereafter is recommended. Serial photographs of the nevus
may aid in detecting changes.

MELANOMA

Malignant melanoma is the most common skin cancer in children, and
approximately 1% of all melanomas occur before 20 years of age. An
estimated 400 cases of pediatric melanoma are diagnosed each year.
The incidence of melanoma in the pediatric population increases with
age, from 1-­2 cases per 1 million in children under age 10 to 16.9 cases
in children age 15-­19 years. The incidence of pediatric melanoma has
increased by an average of 2% per year between 1973 and 2009. This
increase was especially notable in females between the ages of 15 and
19. In this age-­group, melanoma accounts for 6% of all childhood cancers. Melanoma develops primarily in White individuals, on the head
and trunk in males, and on the extremities in females. In preadolescent patients, melanoma is more likely to present on the head and neck
than in other locations. Risk factors for the development of melanoma
include the presence of familial atypical mole–melanoma syndrome
or xeroderma pigmentosum; an increased number of acquired melanocytic nevi, or atypical nevi; fair complexion; excessive sun exposure, especially intermittent exposure to intense sunlight; a personal
or family (first-­degree relative) history of a previous melanoma; giant

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 692 u Cutaneous Nevi
congenital nevus; and immunosuppression (Table 692.1). In previously well children, UV radiation is responsible for most melanomas.
Less than 5% of childhood melanomas develop within giant congenital nevi or in individuals with familial atypical mole–melanoma syndrome. Approximately 40–50% of the time, melanoma develops at a
site where there was no apparent nevus. The mortality rate from melanoma is related primarily to tumor thickness and the level of invasion
into the skin. About 75% of pediatric cases are localized and have an
excellent outcome. Ninety percent of pediatric patients diagnosed with
melanoma are expected to be alive in 5 years. In patients with nodal
disease, the outcomes are intermediate, with about 60% expected to
survive long-­term.
There is variability in prognosis depending on the age of diagnosis
in pediatric patients. Children younger than 10 with melanoma often
have poor prognostic features. They are more often non-White, have
head and neck primary tumors, thicker primary lesions, a higher incidence of spitzoid morphology, vascular invasion and nodal metastases,
and more often have syndromes that predispose them to melanoma.
The treatment of melanomas, as in adult patients, is surgical excision
with 1-­cm margins for tumors <1 mm deep, 1-­to 2-­cm margins for
tumors >1 mm and <2 mm deep, and 2-­cm margins for tumors >2 mm
deep. Sentinel lymph node biopsy has become a widespread practice in
pediatric melanoma. It should be considered in lesions >1 mm and in
thin lesions with ulceration, mitotic rate greater than 1 mm2, and young
age. Though pediatric patients are more likely to have nodal metastases
than their adolescent counterparts, this has not been associated with a
decrease in overall survival. Alternatively, in adolescents, nodal disease
is a significant negative prognostic factor. Increased tumor thickness
and ulceration are associated with lymph node positivity. If the sentinel
node is positive, a lymph node dissection can be considered. Patients
with regional lymph node involvement can be offered treatment with
interferon alfa-­2b or ipilimumab (FDA approved for 12 years of age
and older). BRAF and MEK inhibitors are not currently available for
pediatric patients; however, phase 1 and 2 clinical trials are currently
ongoing for adolescent patients.
Given the lack of effective therapy for melanoma, prevention and
early detection are the most effective measures. Emphasis should be
given to avoidance of intense midday sun exposure between 10 am
and 3 pm; wearing of protective clothing such as a hat, long sleeves,
and pants; and use of sunscreen. Adolescents should be counseled not
to use tanning booths. Early detection includes frequent clinical and
photographic examinations of patients at risk (dysplastic nevus syndrome) and prompt response to rapid changes in nevi (size, shape,

4063

color, inflammation, bleeding or crusting, and sensation). The ABCDE
rule (asymmetry, border irregularities, color variability, diameter >6
mm, evolving), which is a useful screening tool for adults, may not be
as effective for children. Unlike adult melanomas, which are usually
pigmented, pediatric melanomas are often amelanotic and can mimic
benign lesions such as warts and pyogenic granulomas. They are also
more likely to have regular borders and to be less than 6 mm in diameter. They often present as papules or papulonodules. To highlight these
differences from adult melanomas, an ABCDE rule for pediatric melanoma has been proposed: Amelanotic, Bleeding, Bumps, uniform
Color, small Diameter, De novo, and in Evolution.

HALO NEVUS

Halo nevi occur primarily in children and young adults, most commonly on the back (Fig. 692.4). Development of the lesion may coincide with puberty or pregnancy. Several pigmented nevi frequently
develop halos simultaneously. Subsequent disappearance of the central
nevus over several months is the usual outcome, and the depigmented
area usually repigments. Excision and histopathologic examination
of the lesion is indicated only when the nature of the central lesion
is in question. An acquired melanocytic nevus occasionally develops
a peripheral zone of depigmentation over a period of days to weeks.
There is a dense inflammatory infiltrate of lymphocytes and histiocytes
in addition to the nevus cells. The pale halo reflects disappearance of
the melanocytes. This phenomenon is associated with congenital nevi,
blue nevi, Spitz nevi, dysplastic nevi, neurofibromas, primary and secondary malignant melanoma, and occasionally with poliosis, Vogt-­
Koyanagi-­Harada syndrome, and pernicious anemia. Patients with
vitiligo have an increased incidence of halo nevi. Individuals with halo
nevi have circulating antibodies against the cytoplasm of melanocytes
and nevus cells.

SPITZ NEVUS (SPINDLE AND EPITHELIOID CELL
NEVUS)

Spitz nevus manifests most commonly in the first 2 decades of life
as a pink to red, smooth, dome-­shaped, firm, hairless papule on the
face, shoulder, or upper limb (Fig. 692.5). Most are <1 cm in diameter,
but they can achieve a size of 3 cm. Rarely, they occur as numerous
grouped lesions. Visually similar lesions include pyogenic granuloma,
hemangioma, nevocellular nevus, juvenile xanthogranuloma, and
basal cell carcinoma, but these entities are histologically distinguishable. Classic-­appearing Spitz nevi can be monitored with regular clinical and dermoscopic examination, and multiple dermoscopy studies

Table 692.1  Summary of Clinical and Histologic Features by Subtypes of Pediatric Melanoma
SPITZOID MELANOMA

MELANOMA ARISING IN CMN

CONVENTIONAL MELANOMA

Clinical

Papule or nodule; frequently
amelanotic, but can be any color
(e.g., pink-­red to blue-­black);
distribution is not limited to sun-­
exposed skin

New, rapidly growing nodule arising
in the deep dermis or subcutaneous
tissues of a CMN; commonly solitary
and ulcerated; by comparison,
proliferative nodules commonly occur
in multiples and are not ulcerated

Children: typically papules or nodules of any
color, but often amelanotic; most do not
follow ABCD criteria; nodular subtype most
common
Adolescents: similar to presentation in adults
with lesions having ABCD criteria

Histologic

Primary differential diagnosis is Spitz
nevus vs atypical Spitz tumor; most
cells have abundant eosinophilic
cytoplasm and characteristic spitzoid
cytomorphology; nuclear atypia is
typically high grade; growth in the
form of expansile nodules or sheets;
ulceration, epidermal consumption,
brisk deep mitotic activity, and poor
maturation are often seen; epidermal
hyperplasia might be seen on the
surface, but Kamino bodies are
relatively uncommon

The primary differential diagnosis is
benign proliferative nodules arising in
congenital nevi; compared with benign
proliferative nodules, melanomas
typically have epithelioid or small,
blue cell, tumor-­like morphology, with
sheets of melanocytes with high-­
grade nuclear atypia; mitotic activity
is high (often >3/mm2); zones of
necrosis or ulceration can be helpful in
establishing a diagnosis

Nodular melanoma: similar to adult nodular
melanoma; no horizontal growth phase
present; superficial spreading melanoma:
similar to superficial spreading melanoma
in adults with a preceding horizontal growth
phase, pagetosis, lentiginous growth,
and junctional confluence with frequent
alteration of the epidermal contour;
precursor nevus is common

CMN, Congenital melanocytic nevi; ABCD, asymmetry, border irregularity, color variegation, diameter >6 mm.
From Merkel EA, Mohan LS, Shi K, et al. Paediatric melanoma: clinical update, genetic basis, and advances in diagnosis. Lancet Child Adoles. 2019;3:646–654, Table 1).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4064 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 692.6 Nevus spilus.

Fig. 692.4 Well-­developed halo nevus.

and the number of darker lesions may be low or high. Nevus spilus is
rare at birth and is commonly acquired in late infancy or early childhood. Dark elements within the nevus are usually present initially and
tend to increase in number gradually over time. The darker macules
represent nevus cells in a junctional or dermal location; the patch has
increased numbers of melanocytes in a lentiginous epidermal pattern. The malignant potential of these nevi is uncertain; nevus spilus is
found more commonly in individuals with melanoma than in matched
control subjects. Like congenital melanocytic nevi, the risk of melanoma developing within a nevus spilus is thought to be proportionate
to the size of the lesion as a whole. The nevi need not be excised unless
atypical features or recent clinical changes are noted.

NEVUS OF OTA AND NEVUS OF ITO
Fig. 692.5 Dome-­shaped red Spitz nevus.
have demonstrated a tendency for these benign lesions to develop a
reticular or homogeneous pattern and/or regress over time. Guidelines
recommend excision be reserved for suspicious lesions (>8-­10 mm,
with excessive growth, asymmetry, or ulceration) in children over 12
years of age and for suspicious lesions in all ages when melanoma cannot be excluded. If a nevus arouses clinical suspicion that it may be a
melanoma, an excisional biopsy of the entire lesion is recommended. If
the margins of excision of a Spitz nevus are positive but the biopsy sample suggested a typical Spitz nevus, reexcision of the site is no longer
routinely recommended. Because Spitz nevi may be difficult to distinguish histopathologically from malignant melanoma, immunohistochemistry and genomic alteration studies can be useful adjunct tools.
Atypical Spitz tumors are Spitz nevi with atypical histologic features
or unknown malignant potential. Management for these tumors is not
clearly defined and may range from clinical monitoring to yearly nodal
ultrasonography to potentially sentinel lymph node biopsy and lymphadenectomy. Improving genetic profiling of these tumors may provide
better prognostic information soon. Prognostic implication of positive
sentinel lymph node biopsy has not been established, and given the
potential morbidity of the procedure, it is often avoided.

ZOSTERIFORM LENTIGINOUS NEVUS (AGMINATED
LENTIGINES)

Zosteriform lentiginous nevus is a unilateral, linear, bandlike collection of numerous 2-­to 10-­mm brown or black macules on the face,
trunk, or limbs. The nevus may be present at birth or may develop during childhood. There are higher numbers of melanocytes in elongated
rete ridges of the epidermis.

NEVUS SPILUS (SPECKLED LENTIGINOUS NEVUS)

Nevus spilus is a flat brown patch within which are darker flat or raised
brown melanocytic elements with a prevalence of 2–3% (Fig. 692.6). It
varies considerably in size and can occur anywhere on the body. The
color of the macular component may vary from light to dark brown,

Nevus of Ota is more common among females and Asian and Black
patients. This nevus consists of a permanent patch composed of partially
confluent blue, black, and brown macules. Enlargement and darkening
may occur with time. Occasionally, some areas of the nevus are raised.
The macular nevi resemble the more common dermal melanocytosis
of the lower back and buttocks in color and occur unilaterally in the
areas supplied by the first and second divisions of the trigeminal nerve.
Nevus of Ota differs from a more common dermal melanocytosis patch
not only by its distribution but also by having a speckled rather than
a uniform appearance. Both are forms of mid-­dermal melanocytosis.
Nevus of Ota also has a greater concentration of elongated, dendritic
dermal melanocytes located in the upper rather than the lower portion
of the dermis. This nevus is sometimes present at birth; in other cases,
it may arise during the first or second decade of life. Patchy involvement of the conjunctiva, hard palate, pharynx, nasal mucosa, buccal
mucosa, or tympanic membrane occurs in some patients. Malignant
change is exceedingly rare. Laser therapy may effectively decrease the
pigmentation but can be unpredictable.
Nevus of Ito is localized to the supraclavicular, scapular, and deltoid
regions. This nevus tends to be more diffuse in its distribution and less
mottled than nevus of Ota. It is also a form of mid-­dermal melanocytosis.
The only available treatments are masking with cosmetics and laser therapy.

BLUE NEVI

The common blue nevus is a solitary, asymptomatic, smooth, dome-­
shaped, blue to blue-­gray papule <10 mm in diameter on the dorsal
aspect of the hands and feet. Rarely, common blue nevi form large
plaques. Blue nevus is nearly always acquired, often during childhood
and more commonly in females. Microscopically, it is characterized by
groups of intensely pigmented, spindle-­shaped melanocytes in the dermis. This nevus is benign.
The cellular blue nevus is typically 1-­3 cm in diameter and occurs
most frequently on the buttocks and in the sacrococcygeal area. In
addition to collections of deeply pigmented dermal dendritic melanocytes, cellular islands composed of large spindle-­shaped cells are noted
in the dermis and may extend into the subcutaneous fat. A histologic
continuum may be seen from blue nevi to cellular blue nevi. A combined nevus is the association of a blue nevus with an overlying melanocytic nevus.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 692 u Cutaneous Nevi
The blue-­gray color that is characteristic of these nevi is an optical effect caused by dermal melanin. Longer wavelengths of visible
light penetrate to the deep dermis and are absorbed there by melanin;
shorter-­wavelength blue light cannot penetrate deeply but instead is
reflected back to the observer.

NEVUS DEPIGMENTOSUS (ACHROMIC NEVUS)

Nevi depigmentosi are usually present at birth; they are localized macular hypopigmented patches or streaks, often with irregular borders
(Fig. 692.7). They can resemble hypomelanosis of Ito clinically, except
that they are more localized and often unilateral. Small lesions may
also resemble the ash leaf macules of tuberous sclerosis. Nevi depigmentosi appear to represent a focal defect in transfer of melanosomes
to keratinocytes.

EPIDERMAL NEVI

Epidermal nevi may be visible at birth or may develop in the first few
months or years of life. They affect both sexes equally and usually occur
sporadically. Epidermal nevi are hamartomatous lesions characterized
by hyperplasia of the epidermis and/or adnexal structures in a focal
area of the skin.
Epidermal nevi are classified into a number of variants, depending
on the morphology and extent of the individual nevus and the predominant epidermal structure (Table 692.2). An epidermal nevus may
appear initially as a discolored, slightly scaly patch that, with maturation, becomes more linear, thickened, verrucous, and hyperpigmented.
Systematized refers to a diffuse or extensive distribution of lesions, and
ichthyosis hystrix indicates that the distribution is extensive and bilateral (Fig. 692.8). Morphologic types include pigmented papillomas,
often in a linear distribution; unilateral hyperkeratotic streaks involving a limb and perhaps a portion of the trunk; velvety hyperpigmented
plaques; and whorled or marbled hyperkeratotic lesions in localized
plaques or over extensive areas of the body along Blaschko lines. An
inflammatory linear verrucous variant is markedly pruritic and tends
to become erythematous, scaling, and crusted. Many have RAS pathogenic variants.

The histologic pattern evolves as an epidermal nevus matures, but
epidermal hyperplasia of some degree is apparent in all stages of development. One or another dermal appendage may predominate in a particular lesion. These nevi must be distinguished from lichen striatus,
lymphangioma circumscriptum, shagreen patch of tuberous sclerosis,
congenital hairy nevi, linear porokeratosis, linear lichen planus, linear psoriasis, the verrucous stage of incontinentia pigmenti, and nevus
sebaceus (Jadassohn). Keratolytic agents such as retinoic acid and salicylic acid may be moderately effective in reducing scaling and controlling pruritus, but definitive treatment requires full-­thickness excision;
recurrence is usual if more superficial removal is attempted. Alternatively, the nevus may be left intact. Epidermal nevi are occasionally
associated with other abnormalities of the skin and soft tissues; eyes;
and nervous, cardiovascular, musculoskeletal, and urogenital systems.
In these instances, the disorder is referred to as epidermal nevus syndrome. This syndrome, however, is not a distinct clinical entity.

Nevus Sebaceus (Jadassohn)

A relatively small, sharply demarcated, oval or linear, elevated, yellow-­
orange plaque that is usually devoid of hair, nevus sebaceus occurs on
the head and neck of infants (Fig. 692.9). Although the lesion is characterized histopathologically by an abundance of sebaceous glands, all elements of the skin are represented. It is frequently flat and inconspicuous
in early childhood. With maturity, usually during adolescence, the lesions
become verrucous and studded with large rubbery nodules. The changing clinical appearance reflects the histologic pattern, which is characterized by a variable degree of hyperkeratosis, hyperplasia of the epidermis,
malformed hair follicles, and often a profusion of sebaceous glands and

Table 692.2  Epidermal Nevi and Their Associated
Genetic Syndromes
LESION
KERATINOCYTIC NEVI
Epidermal nevus

PATHOGENIC
GENE VARIANT
FGFR3
FGFR2
HRAS
KRAS
NRAS
PIK3CA

Epidermolytic ichthyosis

KRT1
KRT10
KRT2

CHILD syndrome

NSDHL

PTEN nevus

PTEN

Proteus syndrome and epidermal nevi

AKT1

PIK3CA-­related overgrowth spectrum/
CLOVES

PIK3CA

Acantholytic dyskeratotic epidermal nevus

ATP2A2
GJB2

Inflammatory linear verrucous epidermal
nevus

Not identified to date

ADNEXAL NEVI
Nevus sebaceous/nevus sebaceous
syndrome

Fig. 692.7 Large nevus depigmentosus of the abdomen.

4065

FGFR2
HRAS
KRAS
NRAS

Porokeratotic adnexal ostial nevus

GJB2 (connexin 26)

Nevus comedonicus/nevus comedonicus
syndrome

NEK9
FGFR2

Becker nevus/Becker nevus syndrome

ACTB (beta-­actin)

CHILD, Congenital hemidysplasia with ichthyosiform erythroderma and limb defects;
CLOVES, congenital lipomatous overgrowth and vascular and skeletal anomalies.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4066 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 692.8 Epidermal nevus (ichthyosis hystrix type).

Fig. 692.9 Orange-­yellow nevus sebaceus of the scalp.
the presence of ectopic apocrine glands. Sebaceous nevi are caused by
somatic mosaic pathogenic variants in HRAS and KRAS. The disruption
of these oncogenes helps explain the 14% incidence of these lesions developing tumors throughout a patient’s lifetime. Most tumors are benign
(trichoblastomas, syringocystadenoma papilliferum, trichilemmomas),
but basal cell carcinoma can occur as well. Lesions may be monitored
or excised if the family is unable to or uncomfortable with monitoring
alone. Sebaceous nevi associated with central nervous system, skeletal,
and ocular defects represent a variant of the epidermal nevus syndrome.

Becker Nevus (Becker Melanosis)

Becker nevus develops predominantly in males, during childhood or
adolescence, initially as a hyperpigmented patch. The lesion commonly
develops hypertrichosis, limited to the area of hyperpigmentation, and
evolves into a unilateral, slightly thickened, irregular, hyperpigmented
plaque. The most common sites are the upper torso and upper arm (Fig.
692.10). The nevus shows an increased number of basal melanocytes
and variable epidermal hyperplasia. Becker melanosis is commonly
associated with a smooth muscle hamartoma, which may appear as
slight perifollicular papular elevations or slight induration. Stroking of
such a lesion may induce smooth muscle contraction and make the
hairs stand up (pseudo-­Darier sign). The nevus is benign, has no risk
for malignant change, and is rarely associated with other anomalies.

NEVUS COMEDONICUS

An uncommon organoid nevus of epithelial origin, nevus comedonicus consists of linear plaques of plugged follicles that simulate comedones; they may be present at birth or may appear during childhood.
The horny plugs represent keratinous debris within dilated, malformed
pilosebaceous follicles. The lesions are most often unilateral and may
develop at any site. Rarely, they are associated with other congenital
malformations, including skeletal defects, cerebral anomalies, and cataracts. Although these lesions are often asymptomatic, some affected
individuals experience recurrent inflammation, resulting in cyst

Fig. 692.10 Becker nevus on the shoulder of an adolescent male.

Fig. 692.11 Large smooth muscle hamartoma of the buttock.
formation, fistulas, and scarring. There is no effective treatment except
full-­thickness excision; palliation of larger lesions may be achieved by
regular applications of a retinoic acid preparation.

CONNECTIVE TISSUE NEVUS

Connective tissue nevus is a hamartoma of collagen, elastin, and/or
glycosaminoglycans of the dermal extracellular matrix. It may occur as
a solitary defect or as a manifestation of an associated disorder. These
nevi may occur at any site but are most common on the back, buttocks,
arms, and thighs. They are skin-­colored, ivory, or yellow plaques, 2-­15
cm in diameter, composed of many tiny papules or grouped nodules that
are frequently difficult to appreciate visually because of the subtle color
changes. The plaques have a rubbery or cobblestone consistency on
palpation. Biopsy findings are variable and include increased amounts
and/or degeneration or fragmentation of dermal collagen, elastic tissue,
or ground substance. Similar lesions occurring with tuberous sclerosis
are called shagreen patches; however, shagreen patches consist only of
excessive amounts of collagen. The association of many small papular
connective tissue nevi with osteopoikilosis is called dermatofibrosis lenticularis disseminata (Buschke-­Ollendorff syndrome).

SMOOTH MUSCLE HAMARTOMA

Smooth muscle hamartoma is a developmental anomaly resulting from
hyperplasia of the smooth muscle (arrector pili) associated with hair
follicles. It is usually evident at birth or shortly thereafter as a flesh-­
colored or lightly pigmented plaque with overlying hypertrichosis
on the trunk or limbs (Fig. 692.11). Transient elevation or a rippling
movement of the lesion, caused by contraction of the muscle bundles,
can sometimes be elicited by stroking of the surface (pseudo-­Darier
sign). Smooth muscle hamartoma can be mistaken for congenital pigmented nevus, but the distinction is important because the former has
no risk for malignant melanoma and need not be removed.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 693 u Hyperpigmented Lesions

Chapter 693

Hyperpigmented Lesions
Joel C. Joyce
DISORDERS OF PIGMENTATION

Pigmentation of the skin requires migration of melanoblasts from the
neural crest to the dermal-­epidermal junction, enzymatic processes to
form pigment, structural components to contain the pigment (melanosomes), and transfer of pigment to the surrounding keratinocytes.
Increased skin color may be generalized or localized and may result
from various defects in any of these requirements. Some of these aberrations are a manifestation of systemic disease, others represent generalized or focal developmental or genetic defects, and still others may be
nonspecific and the result of cutaneous inflammation.

EPHELIDES (FRECKLES)

Ephelides (freckles) are well-­
demarcated macules—light or dark
brown, round, oval, or irregularly shaped—that occur in sun-­exposed
areas such as the face, upper back, arms, and hands. They are usually
less than 3 mm in diameter and are induced by exposure to sun, particularly during the summer, and may fade or disappear during the
winter. They are a result of increased sun-­induced melanogenesis and
melanosome transport from melanocytes to keratinocytes and not
from increased numbers of melanocytes. They are more common in
redheads and fair-­haired individuals and first appear in the preschool
years. Histologically, they are marked by increased melanin pigment in
epidermal basal cells, which have more numerous and larger dendritic
processes than the melanocytes of the surrounding paler skin. The lack
of melanocytic proliferation or elongation of epidermal rete ridges distinguishes them from lentigines. Ephelides have been identified as a
marker for increased risk for ultraviolet (UV)-­induced neoplasia and
hence melanoma independent of melanocytic nevi. Treatment is not
required, but regular and consistent sun protection can slow ephelis
development.

LENTIGINES

Lentigines, often mistaken for ephelides or junctional nevi, are small
(usually <5 mm but occasionally 1-­2 cm), round, dark-­brown macules
that can appear anywhere on the body. They can be solitary or grouped.
Onset can be at an early age, particularly when associated with genetic
syndromes, but can appear at any age. They are more common in
darkly pigmented than in lightly pigmented individuals. They do not
vary in coloration seasonally and remain permanently. Histologically
they have elongated, club-­shaped epidermal rete ridges with increased
numbers of melanocytes and dense epidermal deposits of melanin. No
nests of melanocytes are found. Lentigines are benign and, when few,
may be viewed as a normal occurrence. They are seen most commonly
on the lower lip and sun-­exposed skin but may occur elsewhere, particularly when associated with syndromes, inadvertent or therapeutic
radiation exposure, or patterned (inherited-­tendency).
Eruptive/generalized lentiginosis (lentiginosis profusa) involves
innumerable small pigmented macules that are present at birth or
appear during childhood. There are no associated abnormalities, and
mucous membranes are spared. Carney complex is an autosomal dominant syndrome characterized by multiple lentigines and neoplasms,
including myxomas of the skin, heart (atrial), and breast; psammomatous melanotic schwannomas; epithelioid blue nevi of skin and mucosae; growth hormone–producing pituitary adenomas; and testicular
Sertoli cell tumors. Components of the Carney complex have been
described previously as the NAME (nevi, atrial myxoma, myxoid neurofibroma, ephelides) and LAMB (lentigines, atrial myxoma, mucocutaneous myxoma, blue nevi) syndromes. The complex is inherited in an
autosomal dominant pattern and caused by an inactivating pathogenic
variant of the PRKAR1A gene.

4067

Multiple lentigines syndrome (formerly LEOPARD) is an autosomal dominant entity consisting of a generalized, symmetric distribution of lentigines (Fig. 693.1) in association with electrocardiographic
abnormalities, ocular hypertelorism, pulmonary stenosis, abnormal
genitals (cryptorchidism, hypogonadism, hypospadias), growth retardation, and sensorineural deafness (type 1, PTPN11 gene; type 2, RAF1
gene). Other features include hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy and pectus excavatum or carinatum.
Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome is characterized by melanotic macules on
the lips and mucous membranes and by gastrointestinal (GI) polyposis.
It is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait caused by pathogenic
variants of STK11. Onset is noted in infancy and early childhood when
pigmented macules appear on the lips and buccal mucosa. The macules
are usually a few millimeters in size but may be as large as 1-­2 cm. Macules also occasionally appear on the palate, gums, tongue, and vaginal
mucosa. Cutaneous macules may develop on the nose, hands, and feet;
around the mouth, eyes, and umbilicus; and as longitudinal bands or
diffuse hyperpigmentation of the nails. Pigmented macules often fade
from the lips and skin during puberty and adulthood but generally
do not disappear from mucosal surfaces. Buccal mucosal macules are
the most constant feature of the disorder; in some families, occasional
members may be affected only with the pigmentary changes. Indistinguishable pigmentary changes beginning in adult life, without intestinal involvement, also occur sporadically in individuals.
Polyposis usually involves the jejunum and ileum but may also
occur in the stomach, duodenum, colon, and rectum (see Chapter
393). Episodic abdominal pain, diarrhea, melena, and intussusception are frequent complications. Patients have a significantly increased
risk of GI tract and non–GI tract tumors at a young age. GI cancer
has been reported in 2–3% of patients; the lifetime relative risk for GI
malignancy is 13-­15. The relative risk of non–GI tract malignancies,
including ovarian, cervical, and testicular tumors, is 9. Peutz-­Jeghers
syndrome must be differentiated from other syndromes associated
with multiple lentigines (Laugier-­Hunziker syndrome), from ordinary
freckling, from Gardner syndrome, and from Cronkhite-­Canada syndrome, a disorder characterized by GI polyposis, alopecia, onychodystrophy, and diffuse pigmentation of the palms, volar aspects of the
fingers, and dorsal hands. Treatment of Peutz-­Jeghers melanotic macules is not required, but various lasers have been effective for cosmesis
in some cases.

CAFÉ-­AU-­LAIT MACULES

Café-­au-­lait macules (CALMs) are uniformly hyperpigmented, sharply
demarcated macular lesions, the hues of which vary with the normal
degree of pigmentation of the individual: they are tan or light brown in
White individuals and may be dark brown in Black children (Figs. 693.2
and 693.3). CALMs vary tremendously in size and may be large, covering a significant portion of the trunk or limb. The borders are usually

Fig. 693.1 Multiple lentigines in LEOPARD (lentigines in association

with electrocardiographic abnormalities, ocular hypertelorism, pulmonary stenosis, abnormal genitals [cryptorchidism, hypogonadism, hypospadias], growth retardation, and sensorineural deafness) syndrome.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4068 Part XXIX u The Skin
smooth (ovoid), but some have exceedingly irregular borders. They are
characterized by increased numbers of melanocytes and melanin in the
epidermis but lack the clubbed rete ridges that typify lentigines. One to
three CALMs are common in the general population, and up to 27%
of children have a solitary CALM, depending on ancestry. The spots
may be present at birth or may develop during childhood. The spots
themselves are benign and may fade with age.
Large, often asymmetric café-­au-­lait spots with irregular borders are
characteristic of patients with McCune-­Albright syndrome (GNAS1
gene; see Chapter 600.6). This disorder includes polyostotic fibrous
dysplasia of bone, leading to pathologic fractures; precocious puberty;
and numerous hyperfunctional endocrinopathies. The macular hyperpigmentation has an irregular border and may be present at birth or
may develop late in childhood (see Fig. 693.3). The lesions are often

unilateral and migrate along the lines of Blaschko. Cutaneous pigmentation is typically most extensive on the side showing the most severe
bone involvement.

Neurofibromatosis Type 1 (Von Recklinghausen
Disease)

The CALM is the most familiar cutaneous hallmark of the autosomal
dominant neurocutaneous syndrome known as neurofibromatosis
type 1 (NF1, see Fig. 693.2 and Chapter 636.1). Included in the criteria for this diagnosis is the presence of six or more CALMs (>5 mm
in diameter in prepubertal patients and >15 mm in diameter in postpubertal patients; Table 693.1). Multiple CALMs commonly produce
a freckled appearance of non–sun-­exposed areas such as the axillae
(Crowe sign), the inguinal and inframammary regions, and under the
chin. CALMs can also be seen in segmental NF1, which results from
somatic mosaicism arising from postzygotic pathogenic genetic variants in the NF1 gene such that the clinical manifestations of NF1 are
present only in a localized body segment. Another variant of NF1 is
hereditary spinal neurofibromatosis, which is a rare disorder that generally presents with multiple CALM and multiple symmetric spinal
root neurofibromas, but other stigmata of NF1 are typically absent.
CALM may be seen in Watson syndrome, an NF1 allelic variant (CALM, pulmonic stenosis intellectual disability, short stature),
mosaic NF1, and Legius syndrome (SPRED1). Differentiation of these
disorders is noted in Figure 693.4 and Table 693.2.
CALMs also occur with certain other disorders, including other
types of neurofibromatosis, but in many of these disorders the CALMs
are not the defining diagnostic feature (see Table 693.2).

INCONTINENTIA PIGMENTI (BLOCH-­SULZBERGER
DISEASE)
See Chapter 636.7.

POSTINFLAMMATORY PIGMENTARY CHANGES

Fig. 693.2 Multiple café-­au-­lait macules on a child with neurofibroma-

tosis type 1. (From Eichenfield LF, Frieden IJ, Esterly NB. Textbook of
Neonatal Dermatology. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2001:372.)

Either hyperpigmentation or hypopigmentation can occur as a result
of cutaneous inflammation. Alteration in pigmentation usually follows
a severe inflammatory reaction but may result from mild dermatitis.
Dark-­skinned individuals are more likely than fair-­skinned children
to show these changes. Although altered pigmentation may persist for
weeks to months, patients can be reassured that these lesions are usually temporary. Sun protection and treatment of the underlying dermatitis can shorten duration.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 693.3 Coast of Maine café-

au-lait macules. Irregularly bordered café au lait macules that
tend not to cross the midline are
characteristic of McCune-­Albright
syndrome. (Modified from Collins MT, Singer FR, Rugster E.
McCune-­
Albright syndrome and
the extraskeletal manifestations of
fibrous dysplasia. Orphanet J Rare
Dis. 2012;7[Suppl. 1]:S4, Fig. 2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 693 u Hyperpigmented Lesions

4069

Table 693.1  Previous and Recently Updated National Institutes of Health Diagnostic Criteria for Neurofibromatosis Type 1
CARDINAL CLINICAL FEATURES (ANY TWO OR MORE ARE REQUIRED
FOR DIAGNOSIS)
NEW CHANGES
1. Six or more café-­au-­lait macules more than 5 mm in greatest diameter
in prepubertal individuals and more than 15 mm in greatest diameter in
postpubertal individuals

Must be bilateral (both sides of the body)*

2. Freckling in the axillary or inguinal regions

Must be bilateral (both sides of the body)*

3. Two or more neurofibromas of any type or one plexiform neurofibroma

No change

4. Two or more Lisch nodules

Or two or more choroidal abnormalities

5. Optic pathway glioma

No change

6. A distinctive osseous lesion such as sphenoid wing dysplasia

Added anterolateral bowing of tibia (tibial dysplasia) or
pseudarthrosis of a long bone

7. First-­degree relative (e.g., mother, father, sister, brother) with NF1

Changed to a parent with NF1 by the aforementioned criteria
New criteria: A pathogenic NF1 variant

*If only café-­au-­lait macules and freckling are present, the diagnosis is most likely NF1, but exceptionally, the person might have another diagnosis such as Legius syndrome. At least one of
the two pigmentary findings (café-­au-­lait macules or freckling) should be bilateral.
NIH, National Institutes of Health.
From Albaghdadi M, Thibodeau ML, Lara-­Corrales I. Updated approach to patients with multiple café au lait macules. Dermatol Clin. 2022;40:9–23, Table 1.

Only fulfills the NIH NF1 CALMs criteria AND age <2.5 y

NF1 and SPRED1 genetic testing (blood DNA)

SPRED1 positive

NF1 positive

NF1 VUS

Consider VUS
review every 2 years

NF1/SPRED1 negative

Consider
RNAseq

Assess for MNF

Not MNF

Legius syndrome
recommendations

Surveillance and management
recommendations for NF1

Baseline eye exam

MNF

Dermatology follow up every 2 years +
consider tissue diagnosis in teenage years

Dermatology exam q1y for additional NF1
criteria at least until age 6

Fig. 693.4 Approach to the genetic diagnosis of young children who solely meet the CALM NIH criteria. MNF, Mosaic neurofibromatosis; NFI,
neurofibromatosis; RNAseq, RNA sequencing; SPRED1, sprouty-­related EVH1 domain-­containing 1; VUS, variant of unknown significance. (From Albaghdadi M, Thibodeau ML, Lara-­Corrales I. Updated approach to patients with multiple café au lait macules. Dermatol Clin. 2022;40:9–23, Fig. 7.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4070 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 693.2

Conditions Featuring Café au Lait Macules
ADDITIONAL TESTING TO
CONSIDER

CONDITION

GENE (INHERITANCE)

ASSOCIATED FEATURES*

Ataxia telangiectasia

ATM (AR)

Progeric changes in skin and hair, hypopigmented
macules, progressive neurologic impairment,
cerebellar ataxia, radiosensitivity, malignancy,
immunocompromise, premature aging, and
oculocutaneous telangiectasia

Karyotype*
Serum AFP*

Cardiofaciocutaneous
syndrome

BRAF, MAP2K1/2 (AD)

Follicular hyperkeratosis, sparse, slow-­growing, curly
hair, ulerythema ophryogenes, melanocytic nevi,
infantile hemangiomas, distinctive craniofacial
features, cardiac anomalies, psychomotor delay, failure
to thrive, and skin abnormalities

Gene panel for RASopathies

Constitutional
mismatch repair
deficiency syndrome

MLH1, MSH2, MSH6,
PMS2, EPCAM (AR)

Adenomatous colonic polyps, multiple malignancies
including colonic adenocarcinoma, glioblastoma,
medulloblastoma, lymphoma, and a positive family
history of Lynch syndrome–associated malignancies on
both sides of the family

Gene panel for Lynch
syndrome genes

Multiple café-­au-­lait
spots

N/A (AD)

Six or more CALMs in multiple generations without NF1-­ No genetic testing available
associated features

Familial progressive
hyperpigmentation
and
hypopigmentation
syndrome

KITLG (AR)

Progressive, diffuse, partly blotchy, hyperpigmented
lesions with scattered hypopigmented spots and
lentigines

KITLG gene testing

Fanconi anemia

FANCA and other genes
(AR)

Faint, ill-­defined CALMs “shadow spots,”
hypopigmented macules, skinfold freckle-­like
macules, progressive bone marrow failure, short
stature, hypogonadism, thumb or other radial ray
abnormalities, and skeletal malformations

DNA breakage studies
Gene panel for bone marrow
failure syndromes

Legius syndrome

SPRED1 (AD)

Six or more CALMs, intertriginous freckling, lipomas,
macrocephaly, and learning disabilities

SPRED1 gene testing

Noonan syndrome
with lentigines

PTPN11 (AD)

Small brown lentigines, café noir spots, CALMs,
dysmorphic facial features, obstructive
cardiomyopathy, pulmonary stenosis, growth
abnormalities, and sensorineural hearing loss

PTPN11 gene testing

McCune-­Albright
syndrome

GNAS (sporadic)

Coast of Maine CALMs associated with the lines of
Blaschko, fibrous dysplasia, and endocrinopathies

GNAS gene testing from
affected tissue (not blood)

Neurofibromatosis
type 1

NF1 (AD)

Six or more CALMs, skinfold freckling, neurofibromas,
plexiform neurofibromas, Lisch nodules, optic gliomas,
skeletal dysplasia, macrocephaly, nevus anemicus, and
juvenile xanthogranuloma

NF1 gene testing (DNA) ± RNA
sequencing

Neurofibromatosis
type 2

NF2 (AD)

Schwannomas, cutaneous plaques with hypertrichosis,
light irregularly bordered CALMs, subcutaneous
nodular tumors, peripheral neuropathy, and
ophthalmologic lesions

NF2 gene testing (DNA) ± RNA
sequencing

Noonan syndrome

PTPN11, SOS2, and other
genes (AD)

Skin hyperlaxity, easy bruising, keratosis pilaris, temporal
alopecia, distinctive facial features, developmental
delay, learning difficulties, short stature, congenital
heart disease, renal anomalies, lymphatic
malformations

Gene panel for RASopathies

Piebaldism

KIT (AD)

Hypopigmented patches of skin and hair,
hyperpigmentation of skin, CALMs, and axillary/
inguinal freckling

KIT gene testing

PTEN hamartoma
tumor syndrome

PTEN (AD)

Hamartomas, trichilemmomas, papillomatous papule,
acral and plantar keratoses, lipomas, autism spectrum
disorder, and macrocephaly

PTEN gene testing

Ring chromosome
syndrome 7, 11, 12,
15, and 17

Sporadic

Depends on which chromosome but may include
CALMs, nevus flammeus, dark pigmented nevi, patchy
hypopigmented areas, microcephaly, mental delay,
short stature, and skeletal abnormalities

Karyotype

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 694 u Hypopigmented Lesions
Table 693.2

4071

Conditions Featuring Café au Lait Macules—cont’d
ADDITIONAL TESTING TO
CONSIDER

CONDITION

GENE (INHERITANCE)

ASSOCIATED FEATURES*

RSS

11p15 locus
Chromosome 7 (sporadic)
CDKN1C, IGF2, PLAGL2,
HMGA2 (AD)

Growth restriction, relative macrocephaly, craniofacial
abnormalities, mild cognitive impairment, and delay

Tuberous sclerosis

TSC1, TSC2 (AD)

Facial angiofibromas, ash leaf macules, thumbprintTSC1 and TSC2 gene testing
like macules, confetti-­like skin lesions, shagreen
patch, Koenen tumors, hamartomas, multisystem
lymphangioleiomyomatosis, epilepsy, cognitive deficits

Molecular and methylation
testing of 11p15 and
uniparental disomy 7 ± RSS
gene panel testing

* All disorders listed have had multiple CALMs associated with them.
AD, Autosomal dominant; AFP, alpha fetoprotein; AR, autosomal recessive; ATM, ataxia telangiectasia variant gene; BRAF, B-­RAF proto-­oncogene; CDKN1C, cyclin-­dependent kinase
inhibitor 1C; EPCAM, epithelial cell adhesion molecule; FANCA, FA complementation group A; GNAS, GNAS complex locus; HMGA2, high mobility group AT-­hook 2; IFG2, insulin-­
like growth factor 2; KIT, KIT proto-­oncogene receptor tyrosine kinase; KITLG, KIT ligand; MAP2K1/2; mitogen-­activated protein kinase 1, MLH1; MutL, Escherichia coli homolog
of 1; MSH2; MutS, E. coli homolog of 2; MSH6, MutS , E. coli homolog of 6; NF1, neurofibromin 1; NF2, neurofibromin 2; PLAGL2, PLAG1-­like zinc finger 2; PTEN, phosphate and
tensin homolog; PMS2, postmeiotic segregation increased Saccharomyces cerevisiae 2; PTPN11, protein tyrosine phosphatase nonreceptor type 11; RSS, Russel-­Silver syndrome;
SPRED 1, sprouty-­related EVH1 domain-­containing protein 1; SOS2, SOS RAS/RAC guanine nucleotide exchange factor 2; TSC1, TSC1 gene; TSC2, TSC2 gene.
From Albaghdadi M, Thibodeau ML, Lara-­Corrales I. Updated approach to patients with multiple café au lait macules. Dermatol Clin. 2022;40:9–23, Table 2.

Chapter 694

Hypopigmented Lesions
Joel C. Joyce
ALBINISM

Congenital oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) consists of partial or
complete failure of melanin production in the skin, hair, and eyes
despite the presence of normal number, structure, and distribution
of melanocytes. These disorders are autosomal recessive in inheritance and result from pathogenic variants in genes related to melanin synthesis or the transport and storage of melanin within cells
(Table 694.1). Tyrosinase is the copper-­containing enzyme that catalyzes multiple steps in melanin biosynthesis (see Chapter 105.2),
and gene variants resulting in abnormal function of tyrosinase and
associated transporter proteins result in various OCA phenotypes.
Gene variants resulting in abnormal structure and function of several cellular organelles may result in OCA with other extracutaneous complications.

Oculocutaneous Albinism with Abnormal Melanin
Production

Oculocutaneous albinism type 1 (OCA1) is characterized by great
reduction in or absence of tyrosinase activity caused by pathogenic
gene variants in TYR. OCA1-­A, the most severe form, is characterized by a lack of visible pigment in hair, skin, and eyes (Fig. 694.1).
This manifests as photophobia, nystagmus, defective visual acuity,
white hair, and white skin. The irises are blue-­gray in oblique light
and prominent pink in reflected light. OCA1-­B, or yellow albinism,
manifests at birth as white hair, pink skin, and gray eyes. This type
is particularly prevalent in Amish communities. Progressively the
hair becomes yellow-­red, the skin tans lightly on exposure to the
sun, and the irises may accumulate some brown pigment, with a
resultant improvement in visual acuity. Photophobia and nystagmus are present but mild. OCA-­TS is a temperature-­sensitive type
of albinism. The abnormal tyrosinase has decreased activity at
35–37°C (95–98.6°F). Therefore cooler regions of the body such as
the limbs and head pigment to some degree, whereas other areas
remain depigmented.

Oculocutaneous albinism type 2 (OCA2) ranges from nearly
normal to closely resembling type 1 albinism. This is the most
common form of albinism seen worldwide. Little or no melanin is
present at birth, but pigment, particularly red-­yellow pigment, may
accumulate during childhood to produce straw-­colored or light
brown skin in White individuals. Pigmented nevi may develop. Progressive improvement in visual acuity and nystagmus occurs with
aging. Black individuals may have yellow-­brown skin, dark-­brown
freckles in sun-­exposed areas, and brown coloration of the irises.
Brown OCA is an allelic variant of OCA2. Prader-­Willi and Angelman syndromes, which include hypopigmentation, have deletions
that include the gene (OCA2) involved in OCA2.
Oculocutaneous albinism type 3 (OCA3), also known as rufous
albinism, is seen predominantly in patients of African descent. It
is characterized by red hair, reddish-­brown skin, pigmented nevi,
freckles, reddish-­brown to brown eyes, nystagmus, photophobia, and
decreased visual acuity. Vision abnormalities tend to be milder than in
other forms of OCA. Abnormal gene variants in TYRP1 are typically
associated with development of OCA3.
Oculocutaneous albinism type 4 (OCA4) is a rare OCA with clinical findings similar to those in OCA2. Gene variants in SLC45A2 are
known to cause OCA4.
Additional rare variants of OCA exist that may present with similar
clinical features to those noted earlier. See Table 694.1.
Cross-­McKusick-­Breen syndrome consists of tyrosinase-­positive
albinism with ocular abnormalities, cognitive impairment, spasticity,
and athetosis. The genetic defect is unidentified.
Because of the absence of normal protection by adequate amounts of
epidermal melanin, persons with albinism are predisposed to development of actinic keratoses and cutaneous carcinoma secondary to skin
damage by ultraviolet light. Protective clothing and a broad-­spectrum
sunscreen (see Chapter 697) should be worn during exposure to
sunlight.

Oculocutaneous Albinism with Organelle Dysfunction

Hermansky-­Pudlak syndrome is a collection of autosomal recessive genetic disorders characterized by OCA, ceroid accumulation in lysosomes, and platelet dysfunction, resulting in prolonged
bleeding time (Table 694.2). Ceroid accumulation over time can
cause damage to the lung, kidneys, and gastrointestinal tract, with
risk of development of granulomatous colitis and/or pulmonary
fibrosis. Abnormalities in the development of platelet-­dense granules lead to platelet dysfunction.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 694 u Hypopigmented Lesions
Table 693.2

4071

Conditions Featuring Café au Lait Macules—cont’d
ADDITIONAL TESTING TO
CONSIDER

CONDITION

GENE (INHERITANCE)

ASSOCIATED FEATURES*

RSS

11p15 locus
Chromosome 7 (sporadic)
CDKN1C, IGF2, PLAGL2,
HMGA2 (AD)

Growth restriction, relative macrocephaly, craniofacial
abnormalities, mild cognitive impairment, and delay

Tuberous sclerosis

TSC1, TSC2 (AD)

Facial angiofibromas, ash leaf macules, thumbprintTSC1 and TSC2 gene testing
like macules, confetti-­like skin lesions, shagreen
patch, Koenen tumors, hamartomas, multisystem
lymphangioleiomyomatosis, epilepsy, cognitive deficits

Molecular and methylation
testing of 11p15 and
uniparental disomy 7 ± RSS
gene panel testing

* All disorders listed have had multiple CALMs associated with them.
AD, Autosomal dominant; AFP, alpha fetoprotein; AR, autosomal recessive; ATM, ataxia telangiectasia variant gene; BRAF, B-­RAF proto-­oncogene; CDKN1C, cyclin-­dependent kinase
inhibitor 1C; EPCAM, epithelial cell adhesion molecule; FANCA, FA complementation group A; GNAS, GNAS complex locus; HMGA2, high mobility group AT-­hook 2; IFG2, insulin-­
like growth factor 2; KIT, KIT proto-­oncogene receptor tyrosine kinase; KITLG, KIT ligand; MAP2K1/2; mitogen-­activated protein kinase 1, MLH1; MutL, Escherichia coli homolog
of 1; MSH2; MutS, E. coli homolog of 2; MSH6, MutS , E. coli homolog of 6; NF1, neurofibromin 1; NF2, neurofibromin 2; PLAGL2, PLAG1-­like zinc finger 2; PTEN, phosphate and
tensin homolog; PMS2, postmeiotic segregation increased Saccharomyces cerevisiae 2; PTPN11, protein tyrosine phosphatase nonreceptor type 11; RSS, Russel-­Silver syndrome;
SPRED 1, sprouty-­related EVH1 domain-­containing protein 1; SOS2, SOS RAS/RAC guanine nucleotide exchange factor 2; TSC1, TSC1 gene; TSC2, TSC2 gene.
From Albaghdadi M, Thibodeau ML, Lara-­Corrales I. Updated approach to patients with multiple café au lait macules. Dermatol Clin. 2022;40:9–23, Table 2.

Chapter 694

Hypopigmented Lesions
Joel C. Joyce
ALBINISM

Congenital oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) consists of partial or
complete failure of melanin production in the skin, hair, and eyes
despite the presence of normal number, structure, and distribution
of melanocytes. These disorders are autosomal recessive in inheritance and result from pathogenic variants in genes related to melanin synthesis or the transport and storage of melanin within cells
(Table 694.1). Tyrosinase is the copper-­containing enzyme that catalyzes multiple steps in melanin biosynthesis (see Chapter 105.2),
and gene variants resulting in abnormal function of tyrosinase and
associated transporter proteins result in various OCA phenotypes.
Gene variants resulting in abnormal structure and function of several cellular organelles may result in OCA with other extracutaneous complications.

Oculocutaneous Albinism with Abnormal Melanin
Production

Oculocutaneous albinism type 1 (OCA1) is characterized by great
reduction in or absence of tyrosinase activity caused by pathogenic
gene variants in TYR. OCA1-­A, the most severe form, is characterized by a lack of visible pigment in hair, skin, and eyes (Fig. 694.1).
This manifests as photophobia, nystagmus, defective visual acuity,
white hair, and white skin. The irises are blue-­gray in oblique light
and prominent pink in reflected light. OCA1-­B, or yellow albinism,
manifests at birth as white hair, pink skin, and gray eyes. This type
is particularly prevalent in Amish communities. Progressively the
hair becomes yellow-­red, the skin tans lightly on exposure to the
sun, and the irises may accumulate some brown pigment, with a
resultant improvement in visual acuity. Photophobia and nystagmus are present but mild. OCA-­TS is a temperature-­sensitive type
of albinism. The abnormal tyrosinase has decreased activity at
35–37°C (95–98.6°F). Therefore cooler regions of the body such as
the limbs and head pigment to some degree, whereas other areas
remain depigmented.

Oculocutaneous albinism type 2 (OCA2) ranges from nearly
normal to closely resembling type 1 albinism. This is the most
common form of albinism seen worldwide. Little or no melanin is
present at birth, but pigment, particularly red-­yellow pigment, may
accumulate during childhood to produce straw-­colored or light
brown skin in White individuals. Pigmented nevi may develop. Progressive improvement in visual acuity and nystagmus occurs with
aging. Black individuals may have yellow-­brown skin, dark-­brown
freckles in sun-­exposed areas, and brown coloration of the irises.
Brown OCA is an allelic variant of OCA2. Prader-­Willi and Angelman syndromes, which include hypopigmentation, have deletions
that include the gene (OCA2) involved in OCA2.
Oculocutaneous albinism type 3 (OCA3), also known as rufous
albinism, is seen predominantly in patients of African descent. It
is characterized by red hair, reddish-­brown skin, pigmented nevi,
freckles, reddish-­brown to brown eyes, nystagmus, photophobia, and
decreased visual acuity. Vision abnormalities tend to be milder than in
other forms of OCA. Abnormal gene variants in TYRP1 are typically
associated with development of OCA3.
Oculocutaneous albinism type 4 (OCA4) is a rare OCA with clinical findings similar to those in OCA2. Gene variants in SLC45A2 are
known to cause OCA4.
Additional rare variants of OCA exist that may present with similar
clinical features to those noted earlier. See Table 694.1.
Cross-­McKusick-­Breen syndrome consists of tyrosinase-­positive
albinism with ocular abnormalities, cognitive impairment, spasticity,
and athetosis. The genetic defect is unidentified.
Because of the absence of normal protection by adequate amounts of
epidermal melanin, persons with albinism are predisposed to development of actinic keratoses and cutaneous carcinoma secondary to skin
damage by ultraviolet light. Protective clothing and a broad-­spectrum
sunscreen (see Chapter 697) should be worn during exposure to
sunlight.

Oculocutaneous Albinism with Organelle Dysfunction

Hermansky-­Pudlak syndrome is a collection of autosomal recessive genetic disorders characterized by OCA, ceroid accumulation in lysosomes, and platelet dysfunction, resulting in prolonged
bleeding time (Table 694.2). Ceroid accumulation over time can
cause damage to the lung, kidneys, and gastrointestinal tract, with
risk of development of granulomatous colitis and/or pulmonary
fibrosis. Abnormalities in the development of platelet-­dense granules lead to platelet dysfunction.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 694.1  Forms of Oculocutaneous Albinism
4072
Part XXIX u The Skin
TYPE

PERCENTAGE
OF PATIENTS
WORLDWIDE

OCA1A

50%

GENETIC VARIANT

FUNCTION OF AFFECTED GENE

COMMENTS

TYR (absence) =
tyrosinase negative

Rate-­limiting steps in melanin formation;
hydroxylates L-­tyrosine to L-­DOPA and
L-­DOPA to DOPA-­quinone

1:40,000; most severe cutaneous and
ocular defects; highest risk of skin
cancer; most common type in Whites

OCA1B

TYR (decreased)

Critical enzyme in melanin formation

Subtypes: yellow (yellow hair); platinum
(metallic tinge); minimal pigment (only
eyes darken)

OCA1-­TS

TYR (variant site
functions at higher
temperatures)

Temperature sensitive

Melanin at cooler sites (arms, legs)
Occurs in Siamese cats
1:36,000 (Whites); TYR-­positive; includes
brown albinism (1:3,900-­1:10,000; most
common form in patients of African
origin; more pigment with advancing
age); also includes red OCA2 with
concomitant MC1R pathogenic variant
and red hair

OCA2

30%

P protein

Transmembrane protein that is key for
melanosome biogenesis and normal
processing and transport of TYR
and TRYP1

OCA3
(Rufous)

3%

TRYP1

Catalyzes oxidation of 5,6-­dihydroxyindole-­ 1:8,500 Africans; reddish-­bronze color to
2-­carboxylic acid monomers into melanin
skin and hair
and stabilizes TYR so it can leave
endoplasmic reticulum for incorporation
into melanosomes

OCA4

17%

MATP/SLC45A2

Membrane transporter in melanosomes
and regulates pH

Rare (Whites); 27% of OCA in Japan;
resembles OCA2

OCA5

Unknown (4q24)

—

One Pakistani family

OCA6

SLC24A5

Na+/K+/Ca+ + solute carrier protein
involved in melanosome maturation and
melanin biosynthesis

Heterogeneous extent of pigmentation

OCA7

LRMDA

Melanocyte differentiation

Rare; skin color lighter only when
compared with relatives

LRMDA, Leucine-­rich melanocyte differentiation associated protein; MATP, membrane-­associated transporter protein; OCA, oculocutaneous albinism; P protein, pink-­eyed dilution
protein; TS, temperature sensitive; TYR, tyrosinase; TRYP1, tyrosinase-­related protein 1.
From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Table 11.1, p. 291.

Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome (see Chapter 170) is another genetic
abnormality associated with dysfunction of lysosome-­related organelles. Patients with Chédiak-­
Higashi syndrome have hypopigmentation of the skin, eyes, and hair; prolonged bleeding times and easy
bruising; recurrent infections; abnormal natural killer cell function;
and peripheral neuropathy. Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome is caused by
pathogenic gene variants in the CHS1/LYST gene, which is a lysosomal
trafficking regulatory gene.

MELANOBLAST MIGRATION ABNORMALITIES
Piebaldism

A congenital autosomal dominant disorder, piebaldism is characterized by sharply demarcated amelanotic patches that occur most frequently on the forehead, anterior scalp (producing a white forelock),
ventral trunk, elbows, and knees. Islands of normal or darker-­than-­
normal pigmentation may be present within the amelanotic areas (Fig.
694.2). The plaques are a result of a permanent localized absence of
melanocytes as a result of a defect in the KIT protooncogene, which
encodes the cell surface receptor transmembrane tyrosine kinase. The
pattern of depigmentation arises from defective melanoblast migration
from the neural crest during development. The reason that piebaldism is a localized and not a generalized process remains unknown. Piebaldism must be differentiated from vitiligo, which may be progressive
and is not usually congenital, nevus depigmentosus, and Waardenburg
syndrome.

Waardenburg Syndrome

Fig. 694.1 White hair and skin in oculocutaneous albinism type 1
(OCA1).

Waardenburg syndrome also manifests at birth as localized areas of
depigmented skin and hair. There are four main types of Waardenburg syndrome with additional subtypes identified. The hallmark of
Waardenburg type 1 (WS1) is the white forelock, which is seen in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 694 u Hypopigmented Lesions

4073

Table 694.2  Clinical Features of Hermansky-­Pudlak Syndrome
TYPE

PATHOGENIC VARIANT

UNDERLYING CAUSE

FINDINGS ASSOCIATED WITH THE
CUTANEOUS PIGMENT DILUTION

HPS-­1
HPS-­4

HPS1 (82% of HPS in Puerto
Ricans; 37% in non–Puerto
Ricans)
HPS4

BLOC-­3 deficiency: HPS1 and HPS4 associate
in a complex (BLOC-­3) that regulates
biogenesis of melanosomes, platelet-­dense
bodies, and the lung lamellar body

Nystagmus, decreased visual acuity; prolonged
bleeding; pulmonary fibrosis (typical onset in
young adults); granulomatous colitis (up to
one third of patients)

HPS-­2
HPS-­10

AP3B1 (∼10% of non–Puerto
Ricans) and AP3D1 (rare)

AP-­3 deficiency: AP3B1 and APSD1 encode
subunits of AP-­3, which mediates protein
trafficking into transport vesicles of the
lysosome (and is thus also involved in
immune function)

Nystagmus, decreased visual acuity; prolonged
bleeding; congenital neutropenia and
impaired NK cell cytotoxicity; recurrent
bacterial and viral infections; conductive
hearing loss; fibrosing lung disease (30–50%)
beginning during childhood; seizures in
HPS-­10

HPS-­3
HPS-­5
HPS-­6

HPS3 (∼20% in Puerto Ricans and
∼12% in non–Puerto Ricans)
HPS5 (∼9% in non–Puerto Ricans)
HPS6 (∼16% in non–Puerto Ricans)

BLOC-­2 deficiency: HPS3, HPS5, and HPS6
are associated in a complex (BLOC-­2) that
localizes tyrosinase and TRYP1, allowing
them to function normally

Nystagmus, decreased visual acuity; mild
extraocular manifestations (bleeding, skin
pigmentation)

HPS-­7
HPS-­8
HPS-­9

DTNBP1
BLOC1S3
BLOC1S6/PLDN

BLOC-­1 deficiency: Dysbindin, BLOC1S3, and
BLOC1S6 are subunits of BLOC-­1 and also
involved in skin melanosome biogenesis
and platelet function

Nystagmus, decreased visual acuity;
prolonged bleeding (may not be a feature
with BLOC1S6 pathogenic variant)

BLOC, Biogenesis of lysosome-­related organelles complex; DTNBP1, dystrobrevin binding protein 1; HPS, Hermansky-­Pudlak syndrome.
From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Table 11.2, p. 295.

Hypomelanosis of Ito

Fig. 694.2 Depigmented macule with islands of hyperpigmentation
in piebaldism.

20–60% of patients. Only 15% of patients have areas of depigmented
skin. Deafness occurs in 9–37%, heterochromia irides in 20%, and
unibrow (synophrys) in 17–69% of those affected. Dystopia canthorum (i.e., telecanthus) is seen in all patients with WS1. Waardenburg type 2 is similar to type 1, except that patients with type 2 lack
dystopia canthorum, but they also have a higher incidence of deafness. Waardenburg type 3 is similar to WS1, except that patients
also have limb abnormalities. It is also called Klein-­Waardenburg
syndrome. Waardenburg type 4 is also called Shah-­Waardenburg
syndrome. Patients with this type all have Hirschsprung disease. Dystopia canthorum is seldom seen in these patients. Multiple pathogenic variants in multiple genes have been identified as
causative of the various types of Waardenburg syndrome (Table
694.3).

Tuberous Sclerosis Complex (TSC1, TSC2 Genes)
See Chapter 636.2 for a discussion of this complex.

Hypomelanosis of Ito is a rare congenital skin disorder affecting children that can have associated defects in several organ systems. There
is no evidence for genetic transmission; chromosomal mosaicism and
chromosomal translocations have been reported. Hypomelanosis of Ito
is a descriptive diagnosis. Blaschkoid or mosaic hypomelanosis may
be better descriptive terms. It is also known as incontinentia pigmenti
achromians.
The skin lesions of hypomelanosis of Ito are generally present at birth
but may be acquired in the first 2 years of life. The lesions are similar to
a negative image of those present in incontinentia pigmenti, consisting
of patterned, hypopigmented macules arranged over the body surface
in sharply demarcated whorls, streaks, and patches that follow the lines
of Blaschko (Fig. 694.3). The palms, soles, and mucous membranes are
spared. The hypopigmentation remains unchanged throughout childhood but fades during adulthood. The degree of depigmentation varies
from hypopigmented to achromic. Neither inflammatory nor vesicular lesions precede the development of the pigmentary changes as in
incontinentia pigmenti. The hypopigmented areas demonstrate fewer
and smaller melanocytes and a decreased number of melanin granules
in the basal cell layer than normal. Inflammatory cells and pigment
incontinence are lacking.
The majority of patients with hypomelanosis of Ito have no associated abnormalities, but involvement of other organ systems can rarely
occur. The most commonly associated abnormalities involve the nervous system, including intellectual disability (70%), seizures (40%),
microcephaly (25%), and muscular hypotonia (15%). The musculoskeletal system is the second most frequently involved system, affected
by scoliosis and thoracic and limb deformities. Minor ophthalmologic
defects (strabismus, nystagmus) are present in 25% of patients, and
10% have cardiac defects. These frequencies are likely to be overestimated because patients with isolated skin disease often do not seek further evaluation. The differential diagnosis includes systematized nevus
depigmentosus, which is a stable leukoderma not associated with systemic manifestations. Differentiation from incontinentia pigmenti,
particularly the hypopigmented fourth stage, is critical for genetic
counseling because incontinentia pigmenti, unlike hypomelanosis of
Ito, is inherited.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4074 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 694.3  Subtypes of Waardenburg Syndrome
DISORDER

INHERITANCE

GENE(S)

OTHER COMMENTS

WS1

AD

PAX3

Most common form; dystopia canthorum

WS2

AD

MITF, SOX10, SLUG, KITLG, KIT

No facial dysmorphism; high risk of hearing
loss; iris heterochromia

WS3

AD/AR

PAX3

Associated limb abnormalities

WS4A

AD/AR

EDNRB

Aganglionic megacolon

WS4B

AD/AR

EDN3

Aganglionic megacolon

WS4C

AD

SOX10

Aganglionic megacolon

PCWH

AD

SOX10

Severe hypotonicity with central nervous
system and peripheral nerve abnormalities

AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; EDN, endothelin; EDNRB, endothelin receptor beta; PCWH, peripheral demyelinating neuropathy, central dysmyelination,
Waardenburg syndrome, and Hirschsprung disease.
From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Table 11.4, p. 298.

Table 694.4  Vitiligo Subgroups

Fig. 694.3 Marbled hypopigmented streaks on the abdomen in
hypomelanosis of Ito.

Vitiligo
Epidemiology and Etiology

Vitiligo is an acquired macular depigmentation disorder associated
with the destruction of melanocytes. The disorder represents a clinical end-­point resulting from a complex interaction of environmental,
genetic, and immunologic factors. Autoimmune, genetic, autocytotoxic, and neural theories have been postulated. The prevalence is 0.5–
2% of most populations.
There is an autoimmune component to vitiligo. Eighty percent of
patients with active disease have anti-­melanocyte antibodies to one
of several antigens on melanocytes. These antibodies appear to be
cytotoxic for melanocytes. There is also a correlation between disease
activity and the titer of serum anti-­melanocyte antibody. Melanocyte-­
specific CD8+ T lymphocytes are also involved in the pathogenesis of
vitiligo. These antibodies and T cells recognize a variety of melanocyte
enzymatic and structural proteins.
The genetic epidemiology of vitiligo is part of a broader genetically
determined autoimmune and autoinflammatory diathesis. Between
15 and 20% of patients with generalized vitiligo have one or more
affected first-­degree relatives. In these families the genetic pattern
is suggestive of polygenic, multifactorial inheritance. In the other
patients, the disease occurs sporadically. Genome-­wide association
studies in patients with vitiligo have identified a substantial number of associated genes, of which consistent association is seen with
DDR1, XBP1, NLRP1, PTPN22, and COMT, although many other
genes have been implicated.

DERMATOMAL OR
SEGMENTAL

NONDERMATOMAL OR
NONSEGMENTAL

Onset in childhood

Can begin in childhood; 50%
before 20 yr of age

Less common

More common

Rapid onset; stabilizes in ∼1 yr

Progressive, with flare-­ups; lifelong

Involves hair after onset

Involves hair in later stages

Autoimmune diseases
uncommon

Personal or family history of
autoimmunity* common

Often occurs on the face or
upper extremities

Occurs at sites sensitive to
pressure, friction, or trauma;
Koebner phenomenon

Responsive to autologous
grafting, with repigmentation

Relapses after autologous grafting

Difficult to distinguish from
nevus depigmentosus

Associated with halo nevus
formation

*Autoimmune thyroid diseases, type 1 diabetes, psoriasis, pernicious anemia, systemic
lupus erythematosus, Addison disease, alopecia areata.

Fig. 694.4 Sharply demarcated, symmetric, depigmented areas of vitiligo.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 694 u Hypopigmented Lesions

A

C

E

B

D

F

4075

Fig. 694.5 Koebner phenomenon in relation to daily living activities. A and B, Eye rubbing. C and D, Underwear print. E and F, Shoe print. (From
Ezzedine K, Eleftheriadou V, Whitton M, van Geel N. Vitiligo. Lancet. 2015;386:74–82, Fig. 5.)

Many authorities believe that the cause of melanocyte destruction
in vitiligo is an interferon gamma–based immune destruction and
melanocyte apoptosis. It has also been suggested that melanocytes are
destroyed because of the accumulation of a toxic melanin synthesis
intermediate and/or lack of protection from hydrogen peroxide and
other oxygen radicals. There is in vitro evidence that some of these
metabolites may be lethal to melanocytes.

Clinical Manifestations

There are two subtypes of vitiligo, generalized (nonsegmental) and
segmental, which likely are distinctly different diseases (Table 694.4).
Generalized vitiligo (85–90% of cases) may be divided into widespread
(type A) and localized (type B). Approximately 50% of all patients
with vitiligo have onset before 18 years of age, and 25% demonstrate
depigmentation before age 8 years. Most children have the generalized
form, but the segmental type is more common among children than
among adults. Patients with the generalized form usually present with
a remarkably symmetric pattern of white macules and patches (Fig.
694.4); the margins may be somewhat hyperpigmented. The patches
tend to be acral and/or periorificial. Occasionally, almost the entire
skin surface becomes depigmented. Vitiligo lesions may develop in
areas of traumatized skin (Koebner phenomenon) (Fig. 694.5).
There are several varieties of localized vitiligo. One form is halo nevus
phenomenon, whereby benign moles develop depigmented rings at the
periphery (see Chapter 692). Premature graying of scalp hair (canities)
has also been considered a form of localized vitiligo. In segmental vitiligo, depigmented areas are typically limited to a dermatomal distribution. This type of vitiligo has a rapid onset and progression in a localized
area without the development of depigmentation in other areas.
A number of autoimmune diseases occur in up to 20% of patients
with vitiligo, including Addison disease, Hashimoto thyroiditis, pernicious anemia, diabetes mellitus, hypoparathyroidism, and polyglandular

autoimmune syndrome with selective immunoglobulin A deficiency. In
addition, other diseases with possible immune defects, such as alopecia
areata and morphea, have been seen in patients with vitiligo.
Vogt-­Koyanagi-­Harada syndrome is vitiligo associated with uveitis, dysacusia, meningoencephalitis, and depigmentation of the skin,
scalp hair, eyebrows, and eyelashes. In Alezzandrini syndrome, vitiligo is associated with tapetoretinal degeneration and deafness. It is typically unilateral. Light microscopic examination of early lesions shows
mild inflammatory change. Over time, degenerative changes occur in
melanocytes, leading to their complete disappearance.
The differential diagnosis of vitiligo includes other causes of widespread acquired leukoderma. The two most common alternative diagnoses are pityriasis versicolor and postinflammatory hypopigmentation.

Treatment

Localized areas of vitiligo may respond to a potent topical steroid
(class I or II) and/or topical calcineurin inhibitor (tacrolimus or
pimecrolimus), depending on the location of involvement. Therapy
with Janus kinase inhibitors has been effective in adults with vitiligo.
In patients with more extensive involvement, narrow-­band ultraviolet light B (NBUVB) [UVB311] is the treatment of choice. Treatment
with NBUVB is often undertaken simultaneously with topical therapy.
Systemic therapy and whole-­body depigmentation are rarely used in
children, although systemic corticosteroids can be given to slow the
rate of change in rapidly progressive depigmentation. In all forms of
vitiligo, response to therapy may be slow, taking many months to years.
For those not interested in treatment, cover-­up cosmetics may be used.
All areas of vitiligo are susceptible to sun damage, and care should be
taken to minimize sun exposure of affected areas. Spontaneous remission may be seen in a small percentage of cases.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4076 Part XXIX u The Skin

Chapter 695

Vesiculobullous Disorders
Joel C. Joyce
Many diseases are characterized by vesiculobullous lesions; they vary
considerably in cause, age of onset, and pattern. The morphology and
distribution of the blisters in these blistering disorders often provides
a visual clue to the location of the lesion within the skin. Blisters localized to the epidermal layers are thin-­walled, relatively flaccid, and easily ruptured. Subepidermal blisters are tense, thick-­walled, and more
durable. Biopsies of blisters can be diagnostic because the level of
cleavage within the skin and associated findings, such as the nature
of the inflammatory infiltrate, are characteristic for a particular disorder. Other diagnostic procedures, such as direct immunofluorescence
on affected tissue and indirect immunofluorescence from a patient’s
serum to detect circulating antibodies, can often help to distinguish
vesiculobullous disorders that have nearly identical histopathologic
findings (Table 695.1).

695.1 Erythema Multiforme

targetoid (target-­like, iris, or bull’s-­eye) papules with an erythematous
outer border, an inner pale ring, and a dusky purple to necrotic center
(which sometimes blisters and erodes; Figs. 695.1 and 695.2).
EM is characterized by an abrupt, symmetric cutaneous eruption,
most commonly on the extensor upper extremities; lesions are relatively sparse on the face, trunk, and legs. Lesions can be seen on the
palms and soles. The eruption often appears initially as red macules or
urticarial plaques that evolve and expand centrifugally to form lesions
up to 2 cm in diameter with a dusky to necrotic center. Lesions of a
particular episode typically appear within 72 hours and remain fixed in
place (average duration: 7 days). Oral lesions may occur with a predilection for the vermilion border of the lips and the buccal mucosa, but
other mucosal surfaces are usually spared. EM may manifest initially
as urticaria-­like lesions, but in contrast to urticaria, a given lesion of
EM does not fade within 24 hours. Prodromal symptoms are generally absent. Prognosis is favorable with limited long-­term morbidity.
Lesions typically resolve without sequelae in approximately 2 weeks,
but in darker pigmented individuals, pigmentary alterations at the site
of lesions can be long-­standing. Progression to Stevens-­Johnson syndrome does not occur. Many authors distinguish between EM minor
(mainly cutaneous typical or atypical targetoid lesions affecting <10%
body surface area plus no or limited mucosal involvement, often limited to one site, such as the mouth) and EM major (same cutaneous
involvement pattern as EM minor plus two or more mucosal sites with
more severe oral involvement). EM major and Stevens-­Johnson syndrome are separate entities.

Joel C. Joyce

ETIOLOGY

Among the numerous factors implicated in the etiology of erythema
multiforme (EM), infection with herpes simplex virus (HSV) is the
most common. Other viral infections, as well as vaccinations, have
been implicated as triggers. Infection with Mycoplasma pneumoniae
and other pathogens may produce a similar lesion, particularly in children and young adults; differentiation from Stevens-­Johnson syndrome
and reactive infectious mucocutaneous eruptions (RIMEs; see Chapter
695.2) can be difficult. HSV labialis and, less commonly, HSV genitalis
are implicated in 60–70% of episodes of EM and are believed to trigger
nearly all episodes of recurrent (six or more episodes per year) EM,
frequently in association with sun exposure. HSV antigens and DNA
are present in skin lesions of EM but are absent in nonlesional skin.
The presence of the human leukocyte antigens A33, B62, B35, DQw3
(DQB1*0301 split), and DR53 is associated with an increased risk of
HSV-­induced EM, particularly the recurrent form. Most patients experience a single self-­limited episode of EM. Lesions of HSV-­induced
recurrent EM typically develop 10-­14 days after onset of recurrent HSV
eruptions and have a similar appearance from episode to episode, but
they may vary in frequency and duration in a given patient. Not all episodes of recurrent HSV evolve into EM in susceptible patients.
Drug-­related EM is less common (<10% of patients) and may be
associated with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents, including
acetaminophen, sulfonamides, and other antibiotics. The differential
diagnosis in drug-­related EM should include severe cutaneous adverse
reactions such as Stevens-­Johnson syndrome (see Chapter 695.3) and
drug hypersensitivity syndrome (sometimes called drug reaction [rash]
with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms [DRESS] or drug-­induced
hypersensitivity syndrome [DIHS]) (see Chapter 686.2).

Fig. 695.1 Early fixed papules with a central dusky zone on the dor-

sum of the hand of a child with erythema multiforme caused by herpes
simplex virus. (From Weston WL, Lane AT, Morelli J. Color Textbook of
Pediatric Dermatology, 3rd ed. St. Louis: Mosby; 2002:156.)

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

EM has numerous morphologic manifestations on the skin, varying
from erythematous macules, papules, vesicles, bullae, or urticarial
plaques to patches of confluent erythema. The eruption appears most
commonly in patients between the ages of 10 and 40 years (with highest
incidence in males in the second decade) and usually is asymptomatic,
although a burning sensation or pruritus may be present. The diagnosis
of EM is established by finding the classic lesion: doughnut-­shaped,

Fig. 695.2 “Target” or “iris” lesions with characteristic central dusky

zone on palms of a child with erythema multiforme caused by herpes
simplex virus. (From Weston WL, Lane AT, Morelli J. Color Textbook of
Pediatric Dermatology, 3rd ed. St. Louis: Mosby; 2002:156.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 695 u Vesiculobullous Disorders

4077

Table 695.1  Sites of Blister Formation and Diagnostic Studies for the Vesiculobullous Disorders
DISORDER

BLISTER CLEAVAGE SITE

DIAGNOSTIC STUDIES

Acrodermatitis enteropathica

IE

Serum zinc level

Bullous impetigo

GL

Smear, culture

Bullous pemphigoid

SE (junctional)

Direct and indirect immunofluorescence

Candidiasis

SC

KOH preparation, culture

Dermatitis herpetiformis

SE

Direct immunofluorescence

Dermatophytosis

IE

KOH preparation, culture

Dyshidrotic eczema

IE

Routine histopathology

EB simplex

IE

Electron microscopy, immunofluorescence
mapping, genetic testing

Junctional EB

SE (junctional)

Electron microscopy, immunofluorescence
mapping, genetic testing

Recessive dystrophic EB

SE

Electron microscopy, immunofluorescence
mapping, genetic testing

Dominant dystrophic EB

SE

Electron microscopy, immunofluorescence
mapping, genetic testing

Epidermolytic ichthyosis

IE

Routine histopathology

Erythema multiforme

SE

Routine histopathology

Erythema toxicum

SC, IE

Smear for eosinophils

Incontinentia pigmenti

IE

Smear for eosinophils
Routine histopathology

Insect bites

IE

Routine histopathology

Kindler syndrome

IE, SE

Electron microscopy, immunofluorescence
mapping, genetic testing

Linear IgA dermatosis

SE

Direct immunofluorescence

Mastocytosis

SE

Routine histopathology

Miliaria crystallina

IC

Routine histopathology

Neonatal pustular melanosis

SC, IE

Smear for neutrophils

Pemphigus foliaceus

GL

Direct and indirect immunofluorescence
studies
Tzanck smear

Pemphigus vulgaris

Suprabasal

Direct and indirect immunofluorescence
studies
Tzanck smear

Scabies

IE

Skin scraping

Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome

GL

Routine histopathology

Toxic epidermal necrolysis

SE

Routine histopathology

Viral blisters

IE

Viral PCR (preferred) or direct
immunofluorescence testing for HSV and
VZV
Routine histopathology

EB, Epidermolysis bullosa; GL, granular layer; HSV, herpes simplex virus; IC, intracorneal; IE, intraepidermal; KOH, potassium hydroxide; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; SC,
subcorneal; SE, subepidermal; VZV, varicella-­zoster virus.

Pathogenesis

The pathogenesis of EM is unclear, but it may be a host-­specific, cell-­
mediated immune response to an antigenic stimulus, resulting in damage to keratinocytes. The HSV Pol1 gene expressed in HSV-­induced
recurrent EM lesions upregulates/activates the transcription factor SP1
and inflammatory cytokines. These cytokines, released by activated
mononuclear cells and keratinocytes, may contribute to epidermal cell
death and constitutional symptoms.

Pathology

Microscopic findings in EM are variable but may aid in diagnosis.
Early lesions typically have slight intercellular edema, rare dyskeratotic keratinocytes, and basal vacuolation in the epidermis, as well as
a perivascular lymphohistiocytic infiltrate with edema in the upper
dermis. More mature lesions demonstrate accentuation of these characteristics and the development of lymphocytic exocytosis, as well
as an intense, perivascular, and interstitial mononuclear infiltrate in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4078 Part XXIX u The Skin
the upper third of the dermis. In severe cases, the entire epidermis
becomes necrotic.

Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of EM also includes RIME, bullous pemphigoid, pemphigus vulgaris, linear immunoglobulin (Ig) A dermatosis,
graft-­versus-­host disease, fixed-­drug eruption, bullous drug eruption,
urticaria, viral infections such as HSV, reactive arthritis syndromes,
Kawasaki disease, Sweet syndrome, Behçet disease, vasculitis, erythema annulare centrifugum, and polymorphous drug eruption.
EM that primarily involves the oral mucosa may be confused with
Stevens-­Johnson syndrome, bullous pemphigoid, pemphigus vulgaris,
vesiculobullous or erosive lichen planus, Behçet syndrome, recurrent
aphthous stomatitis, and primary herpetic gingivostomatitis. In contrast to EM, Stevens-­Johnson syndrome manifests with erythematous
or purpuric macules (no papules) and usually begins on the trunk.
Serum sickness–like reaction to cefaclor (or other antibiotics) may also
manifest as EM-­like lesions; the lesions may develop a dusky to purple
center, but in most cases, the eruption of cefaclor-­induced serum sickness–like reaction is pruritic, transient, and migratory and is probably
urticarial rather than true EM.

Treatment

Treatment of EM is supportive. If secondary to underlying infection,
the infection should be treated. Topical emollients, systemic antihistamines, and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents do not alter the
course of the disease but may provide symptomatic relief. For individuals with severe mucosal disease, opioids can be used to control
pain, and diligent oral hygiene is essential. No controlled, prospective studies support the use of corticosteroids in the management of
EM. Prophylactic oral acyclovir given for 6 months may be effective in
controlling recurrent episodes of HSV-­associated EM. On discontinuation of acyclovir, both HSV and EM may recur, although episodes
may be less frequent and milder. For recurrent cases not responsive
to antiviral therapy, steroid-­sparing agents used to decrease frequency
of recurrence include azathioprine, mycophenolate mofetil, and dapsone. Appropriate laboratory monitoring is recommended. See Chapter 695.2.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

695.2 Reactive Infectious Mucocutaneous
Eruption
Joel C. Joyce
Originally named Mycoplasma-­induced rash and mucositis (MIRM),
RIME may also be caused by other infectious agents such as Chlamydophila, enterovirus, COVID-­19, and others. It is believed to be a
distinct entity not classified as EM or Stevens-­Johnson syndrome/toxic
epidermal necrosis (SJS/TEN).

A

B

RIME presents 1-­2 weeks after a prodrome characterized by
fever, malaise, headache, and cough or features more characteristic
of a specific infection (pneumonia secondary to M. pneumoniae or
COVID-­19). The dominant feature is severe mucositis (Fig. 695.3,
Table 695.2) most often involving the oral (∼95%), ocular (∼80%),
and urogenital mucosa. Rash may be absent in ∼30%, but when
present is sparse; lesions are vesiculobullous (∼75%) or atypical targeted (∼45%), papules, macules, or morbilliform. Lesions
involve <10% of body surface area but rarely may be extensive in
severe RIME.
The differential diagnosis includes EM, which manifests with an
acral rash that evolves from macules to papules to plaques and target
lesions. In addition, severe RIME may resemble SJS/TEN, which presents with macules, purpura, erythroderma, atypical target lesions, and
extensive blistering.
Treatment includes mouth care and pain management. Azithromycin is used when there is evidence of Mycoplasma infection (positive
PCR plus IgM) or Chlamydophila infection. Steroids have been used,
as has etanercept, for more severe disease. In general, RIME is a self-­
limiting disease that heals without residua. Recurrences are rare.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

695.3 Stevens-­Johnson Syndrome
Joel C. Joyce

ETIOLOGY

Drugs, particularly sulfonamides, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory
agents, antibiotics (particularly β-­lactams), and anticonvulsants, are
the most common precipitants of the blistering drug rashes known
as Stevens-­Johnson syndrome (SJS) and toxic epidermal necrolysis
(TEN). SJS and TEN exist along a spectrum: SJS is defined as affected
body surface area <10%, SJS-­TEN overlap syndrome as affected body
surface area between 10% and 30%, and TEN as affected body surface area >30%. TEN is the most severe disorder in the clinical spectrum of the disease, involving considerable constitutional toxicity and
extensive necrolysis of the mucous membranes and >30% of the body
surface area. Approximately 80% of cases are classified as SJS. In children in the United States, the risk of death is 0.3–1.5%. Human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-­B*1502 and HLA-­B*5801 are implicated in the
development of these two disorders in Han Chinese patients receiving
carbamazepine and in Japanese patients receiving allopurinol, respectively. Current thinking defines most cases of classic SJS as secondary
to medications.

Clinical Manifestations

Cutaneous lesions in SJS generally consist initially of erythematous
macules that rapidly and variably develop central necrosis to form
vesicles, bullae, and areas of denudation on the face, trunk, and
extremities. The Nikolsky sign (denudation of the skin with gentle

C

Fig. 695.3 Manifestations of mycoplasma-­induced rash and mucositis. A, Bilateral conjunctivitis. B, Oral mucositis. C, Cutaneous targetoid vesi-

cles; sutures are visible at sites where skin biopsy sample was taken. (From Sandhu R, Mareddy C, Itskowitz M, et al. Mycoplasma-­induced rash and
mucositis in a young patient with red eyes, oral mucositis, and targetoid cutaneous vesicles. Lancet Infect Dis. 2017;17:562.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 695 u Vesiculobullous Disorders

4079

Table 695.2  Mucocutaneous Lesions of Mycoplasma
pneumoniae–Induced Rash and Mucositis
ORAL
Erosions
Ulcers
Vesiculobullae
Denudation
Hemorrhagic crusting
OCULAR
Conjunctival injection
Conjunctivitis
Photophobia
Eyelid edema
Lid margin ulceration
Conjunctival pseudomembranes
Corneal involvement (rare)

A

UROGENITAL
Erosions
Ulcerations
Vesiculobullae
Oro-­esophageal
Mucositis

B

ANAL
Mucositis
CUTANEOUS
Vesiculobullae
Targetoid
Papules
Macules
Morbilliform
From Ramien ML. Reactive infectious mucocutaneous eruption: Mycoplasma
pneumoniae-­induced rash and mucositis and other parainfectious eruptions. Clin Exper
Dermatol. 2021;46:420–429.

tangential pressure) may be positive. The skin lesions are typically
more widespread than in EM and are accompanied by involvement of two or more mucosal surfaces, namely the eyes, oral cavity, upper airway or esophagus, gastrointestinal tract, or anogenital
mucosa (Fig. 695.4). A burning sensation, edema, and erythema
of the lips and buccal mucosa are often the presenting signs, followed by development of bullae, ulceration, and hemorrhagic crusting. Lesions may be preceded by a flulike upper respiratory illness.
Pain from mucosal ulceration is often severe, but skin tenderness
is minimal to absent in SJS, in contrast to pain in TEN. Corneal
ulceration, anterior uveitis, panophthalmitis, bronchitis, pneumonitis, myocarditis, hepatitis, enterocolitis, polyarthritis, hematuria,
and acute tubular necrosis leading to renal failure may occur. Disseminated cutaneous bullae and erosions may result in increased
insensible fluid loss and a high risk of bacterial superinfection and
sepsis. New lesions occur in crops, and complete healing may take
4-­6 weeks, and ocular scarring, visual impairment, and strictures of
the esophagus, bronchi, vagina, urethra, or anus may remain. Nonspecific laboratory abnormalities in SJS include leukocytosis, elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and, occasionally, increased
liver transaminase levels and decreased serum albumin values.

Pathogenesis

Pathogenesis is related to drug-­specific CD8+ cytotoxic T cells, with
perforin/granzyme B and granulysin triggering keratinocyte apoptosis.
This process is followed by expanded enactment of apoptosis involving
the interaction of soluble Fas ligand with Fas receptor. Consideration
has been given to the role that macrophages/monocytes play in the
development of SJS/TEN via tumor necrosis factor-­α, tumor necrosis
factor–related apoptosis-­inducing ligand (TRAIL), and tumor necrosis
factor–inducer of apoptosis weak (TWEAK) signaling pathways. It is
likely that many affected individuals have yet unrecognized underlying
genetic predispositions.

C
Fig. 695.4 Bullae are present on the conjunctivae (A) and in the

mouth (B) with Stevens-­Johnson syndrome. C, Sloughing, ulceration,
and necrosis in the oral cavity interfere with eating. Genital lesions
cause dysuria and interfere with voiding. (From Habif TP, ed. Clinical
Dermatology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2004:631.)

Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of SJS includes TEN, urticaria, RIME, DRESS
(sometimes called DIHS; see Chapter 686), other drug eruptions,
and viral exanthems, as well as Kawasaki disease. SJS has rarely been
reported in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Treatment

Management of SJS is supportive and symptomatic. Potentially
offending drugs must be discontinued as soon as possible. Ophthalmologic consultation is mandatory because ocular sequelae such
as corneal scarring can lead to vision loss. Application of cryopreserved amniotic membrane to the ocular surface during the acute
phase of the disease limits the destructive and long-­term sequelae.
Early topical steroid treatment may also reduce ocular sequelae.
Oral lesions should be managed with mouthwashes and glycerin
swabs. Urogenital lesions should be observed closely and treated
to prevent stricture or fusion. Topical (oral) anesthetics (diphenhydramine, dyclonine, viscous lidocaine) may provide relief from
pain, particularly when applied before eating. Denuded skin lesions
can be cleansed with saline or Burrow solution compresses. Treatment may require admission to an intensive care unit, IV fluids,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4080 Part XXIX u The Skin
nutritional support, sheepskin or air-­fluid bedding, daily saline
or Burrow solution compresses, paraffin gauze or colloidal gel
(Hydrogel) dressing of denuded areas, saline compresses on the
eyelids, lips, or nose, analgesics, and urinary catheterization (when
needed). A daily examination for infection and ocular lesions,
which constitute the major cause of long-­term morbidity, is essential. Systemic antibiotics are indicated for documented urinary or
cutaneous infections and for suspected bacteremia (Staphylococcus
aureus or Pseudomonas aeruginosa) because infection is the leading cause of death. Prophylactic systemic antibiotics are not necessary. Systemic antiinflammatory and immunosuppressive therapies
have been controversial. A large systematic review concluded that
patients who received IV immunoglobulin (IVIG) and systemic
corticosteroids had better outcomes than supportive care alone.
Other publications have found that these agents have not improved
outcomes such as decreased time to healing or shortened hospital
stay. Nevertheless, advocates for use remain, and IVIG (1.5-­2.0 g/
kg/day × 3 days) may be considered in early disease. Total dose >2
g/kg has shown improved but not statistically significant outcomes
in children compared with adults. Case reports/series have demonstrated rapid efficacy with cyclosporine (3 mg/kg/day divided twice
daily), as well as with infliximab (5 mg/kg intravenously for one
dose) or with etanercept (0.8 mg/kg injection once and then a second dose 1 week later). Emerging evidence has supported the use of
anti–tumor necrosis factor therapy in the acute setting, particularly
in adults but also in children.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

695.4 Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis

A

B
Fig. 695.5 A, Large sheets of full-­thickness epidermis are shed. B,

Toxic epidermal necrolysis begins with diffuse, hot erythema. In hours
the skin becomes painful, and with slight thumb pressure, the skin
wrinkles, slides laterally, and separates from the dermis (Nikolsky sign).
(From Habif TP, ed. Clinical Dermatology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby;
2004:633.)

Joel C. Joyce

Differential Diagnosis
EPIDEMIOLOGY AND ETIOLOGY

The pathogenesis of toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) is not proven
but may involve a hypersensitivity phenomenon that results in damage primarily to the basal cell layer of the epidermis. Epidermal
damage appears to result from keratinocyte apoptosis. This condition, typically attributed as a drug rash, is triggered by many of the
same factors that are thought to be responsible for SJS (see Chapter
695.3), principally drugs such as the sulfonamides, β-­lactam antibiotics, anticonvulsants, and allopurinol. TEN is defined by (1) widespread blister formation and morbilliform or confluent erythema,
associated with skin tenderness; (2) absence of target lesions; (3)
sudden onset and generalization within 24-­48 hours; and (4) histologic findings of full-­thickness epidermal necrosis and a minimal-­
to-­absent dermal infiltrate. Skin involvement should be 30% or
greater in contrast to SJS (10% or less) or SJS-­TEN overlap (10–
30%). These criteria categorize TEN as a separate entity from EM.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The prodrome consists of fever, malaise, localized skin tenderness,
and diffuse erythema. Inflammation of the eyelids, conjunctivae,
mouth, and genitals may precede skin lesions. Flaccid bullae may
develop, although this is not a prominent feature. Characteristically, full-­thickness epidermis is lost in large sheets (Fig. 695.5). The
Nikolsky sign (denudation of the skin with gentle tangential pressure) is present, but only in the areas of erythema (see Fig. 695.5).
Healing takes place over 14 or more days. Scarring, particularly of
the eyes, may result in corneal opacity. The course may be relentlessly progressive, complicated by severe dehydration, electrolyte
imbalance, shock, and secondary localized infection and septicemia. Loss of nails and hair may also occur. Long-­term morbidity
includes alterations in skin pigmentation, eye problems (lack of
tears, conjunctival scarring, loss of lashes), and strictures of mucosal surfaces.

The differential diagnosis includes staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome, in which the blister cleavage plane is intraepidermal; graft-­
versus-­
host disease; chemical burns; drug eruptions; toxic shock
syndrome; and pemphigus. The use of skin histopathology to differentiate SJS-­TEN from other similar blistering disorders can be difficult,
but early full-­thickness epidermal necrosis tends to portend a worse
clinical prognosis.
Drug hypersensitivity syndrome (sometimes called DRESS or DIHS;
see Chapter 686), is a multisystem reaction that appears approximately
several weeks to 3 months after the start of therapy with the offending
agent. The skin eruption is variable but can be a red-­pink morbilliform
eruption often associated with facial swelling; lymphadenopathy; fever;
hepatic, renal, and pulmonary disease; eosinophilia; atypical lymphocytosis; and leukocytosis.

TREATMENT

Appreciation of the specific etiologic factor is crucial in the treatment of
TEN. Because most cases are drug-­induced, cessation of the offending
agent as soon as possible is critical. Management is similar to that for
severe burns and may be best accomplished in a burn unit (see Chapter 89). It may include strict reverse isolation, meticulous fluid and
electrolyte therapy, use of an air-­fluid bed, and daily cultures. Systemic
antibiotic therapy is indicated when secondary infection is evident or
suspected. Skin care consists of cleansing with isotonic saline or Burrow solution. Biologic or colloid gel (Hydrogel) dressings alleviate pain
and reduce fluid loss. Opiates are often required for pain relief. Mouth
and eye care, as for EM major and SJS, may be necessary. Similar considerations as in the treatment of SJS (see Chapter 695.3) with systemic
agents may be considered, although controversies remain over relative
efficacy and best treatment regimens.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 695 u Vesiculobullous Disorders

695.5 Mechanobullous Disorders
Joel C. Joyce

EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA

Diseases categorized under the general term epidermolysis bullosa (EB) are a heterogeneous group of congenital, genetic blistering disorders. They differ in severity and prognosis, clinical and
histologic features, and inheritance patterns but are all characterized by induction of blisters by trauma and exacerbation of blistering in warm weather. The disorders can be categorized under
three major headings with multiple subgroupings: epidermolysis
bullosa simplex (EBS), junctional epidermolysis bullosa (JEB),
and dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (DEB) (Tables 695.3-­695.8).
Kindler syndrome, which includes poikiloderma and photosensitivity, as well as easy blistering, is also considered a separate form
of EB. Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita is an autoimmune disorder
producing antibodies to the α chain of type VII collagen. It is rare
in children. It is often acquired secondary to other autoimmune diseases or malignancy but has rare congenital forms. Affected mothers may pass the autoantibody to the fetus, resulting in similar but
transient lesions in the newborn.

EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX

EBS is a nonscarring, autosomal dominant or recessive disorder.
The defect in most common types of EBS is in keratin 5 or 14, which
makes up intermediate filaments of the basal keratinocytes (see
Table 695.6). The intraepidermal bullae result from cytolysis of the

Table 695.3  Epidermolysis Bullosa Simplex (EBS) Clinical
Subtypes

basal cells. There are multiple other rare variants with defects that
also result in intraepidermal blistering (see Table 695.3).
Localized EBS (formerly Weber-­C ockayne disease) predominantly affects the hands and feet and often manifests when a child
begins to walk; onset may be delayed until puberty or early adulthood, when heavy shoes are worn or the feet are subjected to
increased trauma. Bullae are usually restricted to the hands and feet
(Fig. 695.6); rarely, they occur elsewhere, such as the dorsal aspect
of the arms and the shins. The disorder ranges from mildly incapacitating to crippling at times, with severe exacerbations. Blisters
should be drained by puncturing, but the blister top should be left
intact to protect the underlying skin. Erosions may be covered with
a semipermeable dressing. Diligent wound care and protection of
areas subject to pressure are beneficial. Observation for infection is
important and should be treated promptly.
In intermediate EBS (formerly Koebner type), blisters are usually
present at birth or during the neonatal period. Sites of predilection
are the hands, feet, elbows, knees, legs, and scalp. Intraoral lesions are
minimal, nails rarely become dystrophic and usually regrow even when
they are shed, and dentition is normal. Bullae heal with minimal to no
scar or milia formation. Secondary infection is the primary complication. The propensity to blister decreases with age, and the long-­term
prognosis is good. Treatment is similar to that noted earlier.
Severe EBS (formerly EBS Dowling-­Meara or EBS herpetiformis)
is characterized by grouped blisters resembling those of herpes simplex
(Fig. 695.7). During infancy, blistering may be severe and extensive,
may involve mucous membranes, and may result in shedding of nails,
formation of milia, and mild pigmentary changes, without scarring.
After the first few months of life, warm temperatures do not appear to
exacerbate blistering. Hyperkeratosis and hyperhidrosis of the palms
and soles may develop, but generally, the condition improves with age.
Maintenance of nutritional status and treatment of infections is important, particularly in infancy. Day-­to-­day management may involve
wound care techniques as described.

JUNCTIONAL EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA

MOST COMMON EBS
CLINICAL SUBTYPES

TARGETED PROTEIN(S)

AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT EBS
Localized

Keratin 5, keratin 14

Intermediate

Keratin 5, keratin 14

Severe

Keratin 5, keratin 14

With mottled pigmentation

Keratin 5*

Migratory circinate erythema

Keratin 5

Intermediate

Plectin

Intermediate with
cardiomyopathy

Kelch-­like member 24

AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE EBS
Intermediate or severe

Keratin 14, keratin 5

Intermediate

Plectin

Localized or intermediate with
BP230 deficiency

Bullous pemphigoid antigen 230
(BP230) (syn. BPAG1e)

Localized or intermediate with
exophilin-­5 deficiency

Exophilin-­5 (syn. Slac2-­b)

Intermediate with muscular
dystrophy

Plectin

Severe with pyloric atresia

Plectin

Localized with nephropathy

CD151 (CD151 antigen) (syn.
tetraspanin 24)

*Typical recurrent mutation in keratin 5, but cases with other keratin 5, keratin 14 or
exophilin-­5 mutations have been reported; syndromic EBS subtypes in bold.
From Has C, Bauer JW, Bodemer C, et al: Consensus reclassification of inherited epidermolysis bullosa and other disorders with skin fragility. Br J Dermatol 2020;183:614-­617;
Table 3, p. 617.)

4081

Severe JEB (formerly Herlitz syndrome) is an autosomal recessive
condition that is life threatening (see Tables 695.5 and 695.6). Blisters
appear at birth or develop during the neonatal period, particularly on
the perioral area, scalp, legs, diaper area, and thorax. Nails eventually
become dystrophic and then often permanently lost. Mucous membrane involvement may be severe, and ulceration of the respiratory,
gastrointestinal, and genitourinary epithelium has been documented
in many affected children, although less frequently than in severe
recessive DEB. Healing is delayed, and vegetating granulomas may persist for a long time. Large, moist, erosive plaques (Fig. 695.8) may provide a portal of entry for bacteria, and septicemia is a frequent cause of
death. Mild atrophy may be seen in areas of recurrent blistering. Defective dentition with early loss of teeth as a result of rampant caries is
characteristic. Growth retardation and recalcitrant anemia are almost
invariable. In addition to infection, cachexia and circulatory failure are
common causes of death. Most patients die within the first years of life.
Intermediate JEB (formerly non-­Herlitz syndrome) is a heterogeneous group of disorders. Blistering may be severe in the neonatal
period, making differentiation from severe JEB difficult. All conditions
associated with severe JEB may be seen but are usually milder. Localized JEB and JEB with pyloric atresia are similar disorders.
In all types of JEB, a subepidermal blister is found on light microscopic examination, and electron microscopy demonstrates a cleavage
plane in the lamina lucida, between the plasma membranes of the basal
cells and the basal lamina. Absence or a great reduction of hemidesmosomes is seen on electron micrographs in severe JEB and some cases
of intermediate JEB. The defect in severe JEB is in laminin 332 (pathogenic gene variants in LAMA3, LAMB3, or LAMC2), a glycoprotein
associated with anchoring filaments beneath the hemidesmosomes. In
intermediate JEB, defects have also been described in other hemidesmosomal components, such as type XVII collagen (BP180) (gene variants of COL17A1). In JEB with pyloric atresia, the defect is in the α6β4
integrin (gene variants of ITGA6 or ITGB4).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4082 Part XXIX u The Skin
Treatment for JEB is supportive. The diet should provide adequate
calories and supplemental iron. Infections should be treated promptly.
Transfusions of packed red blood cells may be required if the patient
shows no response to iron and erythropoietin therapy. Strict adherence
to wound care regimens is essential. Wound care regimens include
highly specialized nonadherent bandages designed specifically for children with chronic skin fragility. Tissue-­engineered skin grafts (artificial skin derived from human keratinocytes and fibroblasts) may be
beneficial. Birch bark extract topical gel containing betulin is approved
by the European Union and promotes wound healing and controls
inflammation.

Table 695.6  Characteristics of Major Forms of Junctional
Epidermolysis Bullosa
TYPE

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

JEB, severe (formerly
Herlitz)

50% of patients die by 2 yr old
Blisters heal with atrophic scarring but no
milia
Periungual and fingerpad blistering,
erythema
Blistering of oral and esophageal mucosae
Laryngeal and airway involvement with
early hoarseness
Later, perioral granulation tissue with
sparing of lips
Anonychia
Dental enamel hypoplasia, excessive caries
Growth retardation
Anemia

JEB, intermediate
(formerly non-­Herlitz)

Less severe, but similar manifestations to
Herlitz type, including dental, nail, and
laryngeal involvement
Granulation tissue is rare
Perinasal cicatrization
Less mucosal involvement
Alopecia
Anemia but not as severe as JEB,
generalized severe

JEB, localized

Localized blisters without residual scarring
or granulation tissue
Minimal mucosal involvement
Dental and nail abnormalities as in JEB,
generalized severe

JEB, with pyloric
atresia

Usually lethal in neonatal period
Generalized blistering, leading to atrophic
scarring
May be born with large areas of cutis
aplasia
No granulation tissue
Nail dystrophy or anonychia
Pyloric atresia, genitourinary malformations
Rudimentary ears
Dental enamel hypoplasia (survivors)
Variable anemia, growth retardation,
mucosal blistering

Table 695.4  Characteristics of Major Forms of
Epidermolysis Bullosa Simplex
TYPE

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Localized EBS (formerly
Weber-­Cockayne)

Easy blistering on palms and soles
May be focal keratoderma of palms
and soles in adults
25% show oral mucosal erosions
Rarely show reticulated pigmentation,
especially on arms and trunk and
punctate keratoderma (EBS with
mottled pigmentation)

Intermediate EBS (formerly
Koebner)

Generalized blistering
Variable mucosal involvement
Focal keratoderma of palms and soles
Nail involvement in 20%
Improves with advancing age

Severe EBS (formerly
Dowling-­Meara or EB
herpetiformis)

Most severe in neonate, infant;
improves beyond childhood
Large, generalized blisters; later,
smaller (herpetiform) blisters
Mucosal blistering, including
esophageal
Nails thickened, shed but regrow
May have natal teeth

EBS with mottled
pigmentation

Reticulated hyperpigmentation,
especially on arms and trunk
Punctate keratoses and keratoderma

EBS, Epidermolysis bullosa simplex.
From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Table 13.2, p. 319.

JEB, Junctional epidermolysis bullosa.
From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Table 13.4, p. 321.

Table 695.5  Junctional Epidermolysis Bullosa (JEB) Clinical Subtypes
MOST COMMON JEB CLINICAL SUBTYPES

TARGETED PROTEIN(S)

Severe

Laminin 332*

Intermediate

Laminin 332

Intermediate

Type XVII collagen

With pyloric atresia

Integrin α6β4

Localized

Laminin 332, type XVII collagen, integrin α6β4, integrin α3 subunit

Inversa

Laminin 332

Late onset

Type XVII collagen

LOC syndrome

Laminin α3A

With interstitial lung disease and nephrotic syndrome

Integrin α3 subunit

*JEB severe is rarely caused by pathogenic variants affecting the type XVII collagen gene; syndromic JEB subtypes in bold.
LOC, laryngo–onycho–cutaneous.
From Has C, Bauer JW, Bodemer C, et al: Consensus reclassification of inherited epidermolysis bullosa and other disorders with skin fragility. Br J Dermatol 2020;183:614-­617; Table 4,
p. 617.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 695 u Vesiculobullous Disorders

4083

Table 695.7  Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa (DEB)
Clinical Subtypes
DEB SUBTYPES

TARGETED PROTEIN

AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT DEB (DDEB)
Type VII collagen
Intermediate
Localized
Pruriginosa
Self-­improving
AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE DEB (RDEB)
Type VII collagen
Severe
Intermediate
Inversa
Localized
Pruriginosa
Self-­improving
DOMINANT AND RECESSIVE (COMPOUND HETEROZYGOSITY)
DEB, severe
Type VII collagen

Fig. 695.6 Bullae of the feet in localized epidermolysis bullosa simplex.

bold, most common subtypes.
From Has C, Bauer JW, Bodemer C, et al: Consensus reclassification of inherited epidermolysis bullosa and other disorders with skin fragility. Br J Dermatol 2020;183:614-­617;
Table 5, p. 617.)

Table 695.8  Characteristics of Major Forms of Dystrophic
Epidermolysis Bullosa
TYPE

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Dominant
dystrophic

Onset at birth to early infancy
Blistering predominates on dorsum of hands,
elbows, knees, and lower legs
Milia associated with scarring
Some patients develop scarlike lesions, especially
on the trunk
80% have nail dystrophy

Recessive
dystrophic,
severe
generalized

Present at birth
Widespread blistering, scarring, milia
Deformities: pseudosyndactyly, joint contractures
Severe involvement of mucous membranes, nails;
alopecia
Growth retardation, poor nutrition
Anemia
Mottled, carious teeth
Osteoporosis, delayed puberty, cardiomyopathy,
glomerulonephritis, renal amyloidosis, IgA
nephropathy
Predisposition to squamous cell carcinoma in
heavily scarred areas

Recessive
dystrophic,
generalized
intermediate

Generalized blisters from birth with milia, scarring
Less anemia, growth retardation, mucosal but more
esophageal issues with advancing age

Fig. 695.7 Grouped vesicle on an erythematous base in severe epidermolysis bullosa simplex.

Fig. 695.8 Nonhealing granulation tissue in junctional epidermolysis
bullosa.

IgA, Immunoglobulin A.
From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Table 13.6, p. 323.

DYSTROPHIC EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA

All forms of DEB result from pathogenic variants in collagen VII, a
major component of anchoring fibrils that tether the basement membrane and overlying epidermis to its dermal foundation (see Tables
695.7 and 695.8). The blister is subepidermal in all types of DEB. The
type and location of the pathogenic gene variant within COL7A1 dictate the severity of the phenotype.
Dominant DEB is the most common type. The spectrum of dominant DEB is varied. Blisters may be manifest at birth and are often
limited and characteristically form over acral bony prominences.

The lesions heal promptly, with the formation of soft, wrinkled scars;
milia; and alterations in pigmentation (Fig. 695.9). Abnormal nails
and nail loss are common. In many cases, the blistering process is
mild, causing little restriction of activity and not impairing growth
and development. Mucous membrane involvement tends to be
minimal.
Recessive DEB, severe generalized (formerly recessive DEB–
Hallopeau-­Siemens syndrome) is the most incapacitating form of
EB, although the clinical spectrum is wide. Some patients have blisters,
scarring, and milia formation primarily on the hands, feet, elbows, and
knees (Fig. 695.10). Others have extensive erosions and blister formation at birth that seriously impede their care and feeding. Mucous
membrane lesions are common and may cause severe nutritional

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4084 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 695.9 Scarring with milia formation over the knee in dominant
dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa.

Fig. 695.11 Mitten-­hand deformity of recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa.

Fig. 695.10 Severe scarring of the hands and knees in recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa.

deprivation, even in older children, whose growth may be restricted.
During childhood, esophageal erosions and strictures, scarring of the
buccal mucosa, flexion contractures of joints secondary to scarring of
the integument, development of cutaneous squamous cell carcinomas,
and the development of digital fusion may significantly limit the quality of life (Fig. 695.11). Squamous cell carcinomas and infection are
major causes of morbidity and mortality.
Although the skin becomes less sensitive to trauma with aging
in patients with recessive DEB, the progressive and permanent
deformities complicate management, and the overall prognosis is
poor. Foods that traumatize the buccal or esophageal mucosa should
be avoided. If esophageal scarring develops, a semiliquid diet
and esophageal dilatations may be required. Stricture excision or
colonic interposition may be needed to relieve esophageal obstruction. In infants, severe oropharyngeal involvement may necessitate
the use of special feeding devices such as a gastrostomy tube. Iron
therapy for anemia, intermittent antibiotic therapy for secondary
infections, and periodic surgery for release of digits may reduce
morbidity. Wound care dressings, including nonstick dressings
made from silicone, are a mainstay of treatment and the daily maintenance of the skin barrier to reduce new skin trauma and promote
healing. Compounds for treating itch, reducing inflammation, and
fighting infection, particularly with antimicrobial peptides, aid in
promoting more effective wound healing when dressings are used,
therefore reducing morbidity.
Beyond wound care and care of comorbid conditions in EB, a
number of new technologies offer a wider array of practical and
hypothetical treatment options for EB patients. Tissue-­engineered
skin grafts containing keratinocytes and fibroblasts are of some
benefit. Skin grafts that have undergone gene editing may show
promise. Pluripotent stem cells, taken from areas of revertant
mosaicism of a patient’s own skin, provide personalized options

for treatments for affected patients. Redosable gene therapy with
a herpes simplex virus type 1 vector carrying the COL7A1 gene is
FDA approved for patients ≥6 months of age. The therapy is applied
directly to wounds and produces normal collagen type VII alpha
chains. Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation has been shown to
be beneficial in some cases but warrants further study.

KINDLER SYNDROME

Kindler syndrome, often considered a distant subtype of EB, contains features of both EB, such as congenital blistering, and congenital poikilodermas, such as Rothmund-­Thomson syndrome and
Bloom syndrome (see Chapter 697), which include photosensitivity,
congenital poikiloderma, and progressive cutaneous atrophy. Blisters tend to appear on acral sites in infancy or early childhood and
are provoked by trauma. Photosensitivity can appear as increased
susceptibility to sunburn. Both blistering and photosensitivity can
improve greatly with advancing age, but poikilodermatous changes
can be progressive. Sclerodermoid-­like changes and nail abnormalities of the hands and feet, as well as dental abnormalities, have been
reported.
Kindler syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder caused
by pathogenic gene variants in KIND1 (also known as FERMT1),
which encodes kindlin-­1, a protein thought to regulate interactions
between the extracellular matrix and actin filaments. Blister formation has been shown to occur within the epidermis, within the basement membrane zone, and below the basement membrane. Because
Kindler syndrome is often confused with EB, at least initially, it can
be confirmed by electron microscopy, immunostaining for anti–
kindlin-­1 antibodies within the skin, or genetic analysis of the KIND1
gene.
Treatment is similar to that for EB, with efforts to reduce trauma to
the skin, meticulous wound care, and treatment of skin infections. In
addition, sun avoidance measures are beneficial because they can slow
the rate of the development of poikiloderma.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 695 u Vesiculobullous Disorders

4085

695.6 Pemphigus
Joel C. Joyce

PEMPHIGUS VULGARIS
Etiology/Pathogenesis

Pemphigus vulgaris (PV) is a rare autoimmune blistering disorder
caused by circulating antibodies to desmoglein III that results in suprabasal cleaving with consequent blister formation. Desmoglein III is a
30-­kDa glycoprotein that is complexed with plakoglobin, a plaque protein of desmosomes. The desmogleins are a subfamily of the cadherin
family of cell adhesion molecules.

Clinical Manifestations

PV usually first appears as painful oral ulcers, which may be the only
evidence of the disease for weeks or months. Subsequently, large,
flaccid bullae emerge on nonerythematous skin, most commonly
on the face, trunk, pressure points, groin, and axillae. The Nikolsky
sign is present. The lesions rupture and enlarge peripherally, producing painful, raw, denuded areas that have little tendency to heal.
When healing occurs, it is without scarring, but hyperpigmentation
is common. Malodorous, verrucous, and granulomatous lesions may
develop at sites of ruptured bullae, particularly in the skinfolds; as
this pattern becomes more pronounced, the condition may be more
properly referred to as pemphigus vegetans. Because the course may
rapidly lead to debility, malnutrition, and death, prompt diagnosis
is essential. Neonatal PV develops in utero as a result of placental
transfer of maternal antidesmoglein antibodies from women who
have active PV, although it may occur when the mother is in remission. High antepartum maternal titers of PV antibodies and increased
maternal disease activity correlate with a poor fetal outcome, including demise.

Pathology

Biopsy of a fresh small blister reveals a suprabasal (intraepidermal)
blister containing loose, acantholytic epidermal cells that have lost
their intercellular bridges and thus their contact with one another.
Immunofluorescence staining with an IgG antibody produces a characteristic pattern (“chicken wire”) on direct immunofluorescence
preparations of both involved and uninvolved skin of essentially all
patients. Serum IgG antibody titers to desmoglein correlate with the
clinical course in many patients; thus serial determinations may have
predictive value.

Differential Diagnosis

PV must be differentiated from EM, bullous pemphigoid (BP), SJS, and
TEN.

Treatment

The disease is best treated initially with systemic methylprednisolone
1-­2 mg/kg/day. Azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, mycophenolate
mofetil, and methotrexate therapy all have been useful in maintenance
regimens. IVIG given in cycles may be beneficial to patients whose disease does not respond to steroids. Rituximab with IVIG replacement
has been very effective in the management of severe PV. Excellent control of the disease may be obtained, but relapse is common. It has been
successfully used in children.

Fig. 695.12 Superficial erosions in pemphigus foliaceus.
Nikolsky sign is present. Focal lesions are usually localized to the scalp,
face, neck, and upper trunk. Mucous membrane lesions are minimal
or absent. Pruritus, pain, and a burning sensation are frequent complaints. The clinical course varies but is generally more benign than
that of PV. Fogo selvagem (endemic pemphigus foliaceus), which is
endemic in certain areas of Brazil, is identical clinically, histopathologically, and immunologically to pemphigus foliaceus. Anti–desmoglein­1 antibodies in individuals with fogo selvagem cross react with sand fly
(Lutzomyia sp.) salivary proteins, suggesting an environmental trigger
for this autoimmune disease.

Pathology

An intraepidermal acantholytic bulla high in the epidermis is diagnostic. It is imperative to select an early lesion for biopsy. Immunofluorescent staining with an IgG antibody reveals a characteristic intercellular
staining pattern similar to that of PV but higher in the epidermis.

Differential Diagnosis

When generalized, pemphigus foliaceus may resemble an exfoliative
dermatitis or any of the chronic blistering disorders; localized erythematous plaques simulate seborrheic dermatitis, psoriasis, impetigo,
eczema, and systemic lupus erythematosus.
For localized disease, super-­potent topical corticosteroids used twice
a day may be all that is needed for control until remission. For more
generalized disease, long-­term remission is usual after suppression of
the disease by systemic methylprednisolone (1 mg/kg/day) therapy.
Dapsone (25-­100 mg/day) also may be used, with appropriate laboratory monitoring.

BULLOUS PEMPHIGOID
Etiology/Pathogenesis

BP is caused by circulating antigens to either the 180-­kDa or 230-­kDa
BP antigen that result in a subepidermal blister. The 230-­kDa protein
(BP230) is part of the hemidesmosome, whereas the 180-­kDa protein (BP180, now known as type XVII collagen) localizes to both the
hemidesmosome and the upper lamina lucida and is a transmembrane
collagenous protein.

Clinical Manifestations

Pemphigus foliaceus is caused by circulating antibodies to a 50-­kDa
portion of the 160-­kDa desmosomal glycoprotein desmoglein I, which
result in subcorneal cleavage leading to superficial erosions. This
extremely rare disorder is characterized by subcorneal blistering; the
site of cleavage is high in the epidermis rather than suprabasal as in PV.

The blisters of BP typically arise in crops on a normal, erythematous,
eczematous, or urticarial base. Bullae appear predominantly on the
flexural aspects of the extremities, in the axillae, and on the groin
and central abdomen. Infants have involvement of the palms, soles,
and face more frequently than older children do. Individual lesions
vary greatly in size, are tense, and are filled with serous fluid that may
become hemorrhagic or turbid. Oral lesions occur less frequently and
are less severe than in PV. Pruritus, a burning sensation, and subcutaneous edema may accompany the eruption, but constitutional symptoms are not prominent.

Clinical Manifestations

Pathology

PEMPHIGUS FOLIACEUS
Etiology/Pathogenesis

The superficial blisters rupture quickly, leaving erosions surrounded
by erythema that heal with crusting and scaling (Fig. 695.12). The

Biopsy material should be taken from an early bulla arising
on an erythematous base. A subepidermal bulla and a dermal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4086 Part XXIX u The Skin
inflammatory infiltrate, predominantly of eosinophils, can be identified histopathologically. In sections of a blister or perilesional
skin, a band of Ig (usually IgG) and C3 can be demonstrated in
the basement membrane zone by direct immunofluorescence. Indirect immunofluorescence studies of serum have positive results in
~70% of cases for IgG antibodies to the basement membrane zone;
however, the titers do not correlate well with the clinical course.

Diagnosis and Differential Diagnoses

BP rarely occurs in children but must be considered in the differential
diagnosis of any chronic blistering disorder. The differential diagnosis
includes bullous EM, PV, linear IgA dermatosis, bullous drug eruption, dermatitis herpetiformis (DH), herpes simplex infection, and
bullous impetigo, which can be differentiated by histologic examination, immunofluorescence studies, and cultures. The large, tense
bullae of BP can generally be distinguished from the smaller, flaccid
bullae of PV.

Fig. 695.13 Multiple excoriations around the elbows in dermatitis
herpetiformis.

TREATMENT

Treatment

Localized BP can be successfully suppressed with super-­potent topical corticosteroids (clobetasol propionate) twice a day. Generalized
disease usually requires systemic methylprednisolone (1 mg/kg/day)
therapy. Doxycycline has some benefits but is not as effective as prednisone. Rarely are other immunosuppressive treatments necessary, such
as azathioprine or mycophenolate mofetil. Refractory cases have been
treated with rituximab, but the condition usually remits within a year
in most children.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

695.7 Dermatitis Herpetiformis
Joel C. Joyce

ETIOLOGY/PATHOGENESIS

In dermatitis herpetiformis (DH), IgA antibodies are directed at
epidermal transglutaminase (transglutaminase 3). Gluten-­sensitive
enteropathy (celiac disease) is found in all patients with DH,
although the majority are asymptomatic or have minimal gastrointestinal symptoms (see Chapter 384). The severity of the skin
disease and the responsiveness to gluten restriction do not correlate with the severity of the intestinal inflammation. An antibody
to smooth muscle endomysium is found in 70–90% of patients
with DH. Ninety percent of patients with the disease express
HLA-­D Q2. HLA-­D Q2–negative patients with DH usually express
HLA-­D Q8.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

DH is characterized by symmetric, grouped, small, tense, erythematous, stinging, intensely pruritic papules and vesicles. The eruption is
pleomorphic, including erythematous, urticarial, papular, vesicular,
and bullous lesions. Sites of predilection are the knees, elbows, shoulders, buttocks, forehead, and scalp; mucous membranes are usually
spared. Hemorrhagic lesions may develop on the palms and soles.
When pruritus is severe, excoriations may be the only visible sign (Fig.
695.13).

PATHOLOGY

Subepidermal blisters composed predominantly of neutrophils are
found in dermal papillae. The presence of granular IgA on direct
immunofluorescence in the dermal papillary tips is diagnostic.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

DH may mimic other chronic blistering disorders and may also resemble scabies, papular urticaria, insect bites, contact dermatitis, and papular eczema.

Patients with DH show response within weeks to months to a gluten-­
free diet. Oral administration of dapsone (0.5-­2.0 mg/kg/day daily or
divided twice daily) provides immediate relief from the intense pruritus
but must be used with caution because of possible serious side effects
(methemoglobinemia, hemolysis, and drug hypersensitivity syndrome
[sulfone syndrome]). Dapsone alone may not relieve the intestinal
inflammation of celiac disease. Local antipruritic measures may also be
useful. Jejunal biopsy is indicated to diagnose gluten-­sensitive enteropathy because cutaneous manifestations may precede malabsorption.
The disease is chronic, and either a gluten-­free diet or dapsone must be
continued indefinitely to prevent relapse.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

695.8 Linear Immunoglobulin A (IgA)
Dermatosis (Chronic Bullous
Dermatosis of Childhood)
Joel C. Joyce

ETIOLOGY/PATHOGENESIS

Linear IgA dermatosis is a heterogeneous autoimmune disorder with
antibodies targeting multiple antigens. It has been reported to be the
most common autoimmune blistering disorder in children. It is caused
by circulating IgA antibodies, most commonly to LABD97 and LAD-­1,
which are degradation proteins of BP180 (type XVII collagen). Linear IgA dermatosis may also be seen as a drug eruption. Most cases
of drug-­induced linear IgA dermatosis are related to vancomycin,
although anticonvulsants, ampicillin, cyclosporine, and captopril are
implicated.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

This rare dermatosis is most common in the first decade of life, with
a peak incidence during the preschool years. The eruption consists
of many large, symmetrically located, tense bullae filled with clear or
hemorrhagic fluid. The bullae are often clustered together and develop
on a normal or erythematous urticarial base. Areas of predilection are
the genitals and buttocks (Fig. 695.14), the perioral region, and the
scalp. Sausage-­shaped bullae may be arranged in an annular or rosette-­
like fashion around a central crust (Fig. 695.15). Erythematous plaques
with gyrate margins bordered by intact bullae may develop over larger
areas. Pruritus may be absent or very intense, and systemic signs or
symptoms are absent.

PATHOLOGY

The subepidermal bullae are infiltrated with a mixture of inflammatory
cells. Neutrophilic abscesses may be noted in the dermal papillary tips,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 696 u Eczematous Disorders

4087

Chapter 696

Eczematous Disorders
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu

Fig. 695.14 Erosion on an erythematous base after loss of blister roof
in linear IgA dermatosis.

Eczematous disorders are a broad group of cutaneous eruptions characterized by erythema, edema, and pruritus. Acute eczematous lesions demonstrate erythema, weeping, oozing, and the formation of microvesicles
within the epidermis. Chronic lesions are generally thickened, dry, and
scaly, with coarse skin markings (lichenification) and altered pigmentation. Many types of eczema occur in children; the most common is atopic
dermatitis (see Chapter 186), although seborrheic dermatitis, allergic and
irritant contact dermatitis, nummular eczema, and acute palmoplantar
eczema (dyshidrosis) are also relatively common in childhood.
Once the diagnosis of eczema has been established, it is important to
further classify the eruption more specifically for proper management.
Pertinent historical data often provide the clue. In some instances, the
subsequent course and character of the eruption permit classification.
Histologic changes are relatively nonspecific, but all types of eczematous
dermatitis are characterized by intraepidermal edema known as spongiosis.

696.1 Contact Dermatitis
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu
The form of eczema known as contact dermatitis can be subdivided into
irritant dermatitis, in which nonspecific injury to the skin causes immediate inflammation, and allergic contact dermatitis, resulting from a delayed
hypersensitivity reaction. Irritant dermatitis is more frequent in children,
particularly during the early years of life. Allergic reactions increase in frequency upon maturation of the immune system.

IRRITANT CONTACT DERMATITIS

Fig. 695.15 Linear IgA bullous dermatitis. (Modified from Gouveia AI,

Teixeira A, Freitas JP, et al. Linear immunoglobulin A bullous dermatosis. J Pediatr. 2016;170:338, Fig. 1A.)

indistinguishable from those of DH. The infiltrate may also be largely
eosinophilic, resembling that in BP. Therefore direct immunofluorescence
studies are required for a definitive diagnosis of linear IgA dermatosis; perilesional skin demonstrates linear deposition of IgA and sometimes IgG
and C3 at the dermal-­epidermal junction. Immunoelectron microscopy
has localized the immunoreactants to the sublamina densa, although a
combined sublamina densa and lamina lucida pattern has also been seen.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The eruption can be distinguished by histopathologic and immunofluorescence studies from PV, BP, DH, scabies, and EM. Gram stain and
culture preclude the diagnosis of bullous impetigo.

TREATMENT

Many cases of linear IgA dermatosis respond favorably to oral dapsone (see treatment of DH) or sulfapyridine. Other antibiotics, including erythromycin and dicloxacillin, have been used, but the response
is often transient. Children who show no response to dapsone may
benefit from oral therapy with methylprednisolone (1 mg/kg/day) or
a combination of these drugs. The usual course is 2-­4 years, although
some children have persistent or recurrent disease; there are typically
no long-­term sequelae. IgA nephropathy is a rare complication.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Irritant contact dermatitis can result from prolonged or repetitive contact with physical, chemical, or mechanical irritants, including saliva,
urine, feces, fragrance, detergents, dyes, henna, plants, caterpillars,
abrasive materials, and chafing.
Irritant contact dermatitis may be difficult to distinguish from atopic
dermatitis or allergic contact dermatitis. A detailed history and consideration of the sites of involvement, the age of the child, and contactants usually provide clues to the etiologic agent. The propensity for
development of irritant dermatitis varies considerably among children;
some may respond to minimal injury, making it difficult to identify
the offending agent through history. Children with atopic dermatitis
are more prone to irritant contact dermatitis as an exacerbating factor.
Irritant contact dermatitis usually clears after removal of the stimulus
and temporary treatment with a topical corticosteroid preparation (see
Chapter 687). Education of patients and parents about the causes of
contact dermatitis is crucial to successful therapy.
Dry skin dermatitis results from repetitive wet-­to-­dry behaviors
such as lip licking (Fig. 696.1), thumb sucking, frequent handwashing, or excessive sweating. Involved skin is erythematous and fissured,
localized to the area of exposure. Treatment of dry skin dermatitis
begins with eliminating the offending wet-­to-­dry behavior. A thick
moisturizer (cream or ointment based) applied twice daily decreases
transepidermal water loss and replenishes skin lipids to improve hydration. A topical steroid is usually necessary to treat the inflammation.
Juvenile plantar dermatosis occurs mainly in prepubertal children
with hyperhidrosis who wear occlusive synthetic footwear. Weight-­bearing
surfaces of the foot may be pruritic or painful and develop a fissured or
glazed appearance (Fig. 696.2). Immediate application of a thick emollient when socks and shoes are removed or immediately after swimming
usually minimizes juvenile plantar dermatosis. Severe inflammatory cases
may require short-­term (1-­2 weeks) application of a medium-­to high-­
potency topical steroid.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4088 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 696.1 Perioral irritant contact dermatitis from lip licking.

Fig. 696.3 Severe, erosive diaper dermatitis.

Fig. 696.2 Red, scaly juvenile plantar dermatosis.

DIAPER DERMATITIS

Diaper dermatitis refers to any rash in the diaper region; the most
common of these is irritant diaper dermatitis. Elevated pH in the diaper area and synergistic activity of urinary and fecal enzymes lead to
inflammation, which disrupts the normal skin barrier and increases
susceptibility to other irritants and organisms. Additional factors are
occlusion, friction, and use of diaper wipes and topical preparations.
Loose or frequent stooling predisposes an infant to diaper dermatitis.
Diaper dermatitis presents with erythema and scaling in a patchy or
confluent pattern and, in severe cases, may have papulovesicular or
bullous lesions, fissures, and/or erosions (Fig. 696.3). The genitocrural
folds are often spared because concave areas are relatively protected.
Chronic hypertrophic, flat-­topped papules and infiltrative nodules may
occur. Candidal infection typically represents a secondary process. It
is characterized by “beefy” red-­pink, tender skin that has numerous 1-­
to 2-­mm pustules and satellite papules and involves both concave and
convex areas. Discomfort may be marked because of intense inflammation. Allergic contact dermatitis, seborrheic dermatitis, psoriasis,
candidiasis, atopic dermatitis, child abuse, and rare disorders such as
Langerhans cell histiocytosis, nutritional deficiencies, and acrodermatitis enteropathica should be considered when the eruption is persistent or is recalcitrant to simple therapeutic measures (Table 696.1).
Diaper dermatitis often responds to simple measures; some infants
are predisposed to diaper dermatitis, and management may be difficult.
The damaging effects of overhydration of the skin and prolonged contact
with feces and urine can be obviated by frequent changing of the diapers
and periods of “rest” free of diaper use. Cleansing of affected skin is best
accomplished with a soft cloth and lukewarm water, patted dry. Overwashing should be avoided because it leads to chapping and may worsen the
dermatitis. Disposable diapers containing a superabsorbent material may
help to maintain a relatively dry environment. First-­line therapy for diaper
dermatitis is application of a protective barrier agent (ointment or paste)

containing petroleum or zinc oxide at every diaper change. Topical sucralfate is an effective barrier with some antibacterial activity and is useful for
recalcitrant cases. Low-­potency nonhalogenated topical corticosteroids,
such as 2.5% hydrocortisone, may be used for short periods (3-­5 days).
Treatment with a topical anticandidal agent is indicated for secondary candidal infection. Topical preparations containing triamcinolone-­nystatin
and betamethasone dipropionate-­clotrimazole are generally inappropriate for diaper dermatitis in infants because of the higher potency of the
corticosteroid component. If using multiple topical agents, the protective
barrier should be applied last. When diaper dermatitis does not respond to
typical prevention and treatment strategies, non–diaper-­associated causes
must be considered.

ALLERGIC CONTACT DERMATITIS

Allergic contact dermatitis is a delayed hypersensitivity cutaneous reaction to environmental allergens and should be considered in any child with
recalcitrant eczema. It has been estimated to affect 16.4% of all children in
the United States, though children are likely underdiagnosed, especially
those with concomitant atopic dermatitis. Children of all ages may develop
allergic contact dermatitis, though it is more common in older children.
Allergic contact dermatitis is a T-­cell–mediated hypersensitivity reaction
that is provoked by application of an antigen to the skin surface. The antigen penetrates the skin, where it is conjugated with a cutaneous protein,
and the hapten-­protein complex is transported to the regional lymph
nodes by antigen-­presenting Langerhans cells. A primary immunologic
response occurs locally in the nodes and becomes generalized, presumably because of dissemination of sensitized T cells. Sensitization requires
several days and, when followed by a fresh antigenic challenge, manifests
as allergic contact dermatitis. Generalized distribution may also occur if
enough antigen finds its way into the circulation, such as by consumption.
Once sensitization has occurred, each new antigenic challenge may provoke an inflammatory reaction within 8-­12 hours; sensitization to a particular antigen usually persists for many years.
Acute allergic contact dermatitis is an erythematous, intensely pruritic,
eczematous dermatitis. Acute cases may be edematous and vesiculobullous. The chronic condition has the features of long-­standing eczema:
lichenification, scaling, fissuring, and pigmentary change. Distinguishing
allergic contact dermatitis from other eczematous disorders can be challenging, especially with irritant contact dermatitis, which can be clinically
identical. The distribution of the eruption often provides a clue to the diagnosis. Airborne sensitizers usually affect exposed areas, such as the face
and arms. Jewelry, topical agents, shoes, clothing, henna tattoo dyes, plants,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 696 u Eczematous Disorders

4089

Table 696.1  Diaper Dermatitis
DISEASE

CLINICAL MANIFESTATION

OTHER FEATURES

TREATMENT

Friction

Inner surface of thighs, genitalia, buttocks,
abdomen

Course waxes and wanes
Aggravated by talc

Responds well to diaper changes
Avoidance of diapers

Irritant

Mild erythema with shiny surface and
occasional papules
Confined to convex surfaces
Spares intertriginous areas

Exacerbated by heat, moisture, and
sweat retention

Gentle cleansing
Regular diaper changes
Barrier creams (zinc oxide, Vaseline)
Low-­potency topical steroids can
help

Allergic contact

Typically confined to convex surfaces
Skin involved is in direct contact with offending
agent
Mild cases: diffuse erythema, papules, vesicles,
scaling
Severe cases: papules, plaques, psoriasiform
lesions, ulcerations, infiltrative nodules

Often related to topical antibiotics
(neomycin, bacitracin)
Certain emulsifiers in topical
products
Preservatives in wet wipes can be an
offender

Remove offending agent
Judicious use of low-­potency
topical steroids
Barrier creams/ointments

Seborrheic
dermatitis

Salmon-­colored patches
Often have yellow, greasy scale
Fissures, erosions, maceration, and weeping
can be seen

Axillae, ear creases, and neck are
often involved
“Cradle cap” on scalp
Hypopigmentation often seen in
patients with darker skin tones

Low-­potency topical steroids
If coexistent infection—antifungal
or antibacterial agents

Candidiasis

Usually involves intertriginous areas and convex
surfaces
Bright-­red papules and plaques
Satellite lesions on abdomen and thighs

Oral thrush may be present
Often occurs after treatment with
systemic antibiotics or local
topical steroid use

Topical anticandidal agent,
including nystatin

Intertrigo

Well-­demarcated, macerated plaques with
weeping
Gluteal cleft and fleshy folds of thighs

May be associated with miliaria

Avoiding excessive heat
Cool clothing

Psoriasis

Bright red, scaly, well-­demarcated plaques
Can persist for months
Less responsive to topical treatment

Red, sometimes scaly
Can be present on extremities or
trunk
Nail changes seen
Family history

Low-­potency topical steroids
Moisturizers

Staphylococcal
infection

Many thin-­walled pustules with pink-­red base
Collarette of scale after rupturing

Acrodermatitis
enteropathica
(zinc deficiency)

Early lesions are vesicular and pustular
Become confluent, pink, dry, scaly, crusty
plaques

Perioral skin typically also involved
Irritability or listlessness
Failure to thrive, alopecia, diarrhea

Secondary to zinc deficiency or
inborn error of zinc transporter
Treat with zinc replacement

Langerhans cell
histiocytosis

May mimic candidiasis or seborrheic dermatitis
Persistent, does not improve with standard
treatments
Clusters of infiltrative, crusted, hemorrhagic
papules
Ulceration can be seen

Involvement of groin, axillae,
periauricular skin, hairline, and
scalp
Anemia, thrombocytopenia,
hepatosplenomegaly, and osseous
lesions

Chemotherapy

Antistaphylococcal therapy

From Humphrey S. Congenital cutaneous lesions and infantile rashes. In: Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis, 2nd ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table 60.2, p. 1144.

and even toilet seats cause dermatitis at points of contact. Careful evaluation of environmental exposures, cultural customs, daily activity, animal exposures, ear piercing, tattooing, and personal product usage in the
patient and all caregivers is essential. Other potential diagnoses to consider
include herpes simplex virus, impetigo, cellulitis, and dermatophytoses.
Rhus dermatitis (poison ivy, poison sumac, poison oak), a response
to the plant allergen urushiol, is the most common allergic contact dermatitis. It is often vesiculobullous and may be distinguished by linear
streaks of vesicles where the plant leaves have brushed against the skin
(Fig. 696.4). Fluid from ruptured cutaneous vesicles does not spread the
eruption; antigen retained on skin, clothing, or under fingernails initiates new plaques of dermatitis if not removed by washing with soap
and water. Antigen may also be carried by animals on their fur. “Black
spot” poison ivy dermatitis is a rare variant that results from oxidation of concentrated urushiol left on the skin and manifests as small
discrete black lacquer–like glossy papules with surrounding erythema
and edema. Sensitization to one plant produces cross reactions with the
others. Spontaneous resolution occurs in 1-­3 weeks, with the most common complication being secondary bacterial infection with normal skin
flora. Exposure avoidance and thorough washing after exposure are the

mainstays for prevention. Barrier creams or organoclay compounds such
as bentoquatam may be effective if applied before expected exposure.
Nickel dermatitis develops from contact with jewelry, metal closures
on clothing, or even cell phones. Metal closures on pants frequently cause
periumbilical dermatitis (Fig. 696.5). Some children are exquisitely sensitive to nickel, with even the trace amounts found in gold jewelry provoking
eruptions. The most frequently involved sites from jewelry are the earlobes
from nickel-­containing earrings. Early ear piercing increases risk of sensitization, and it is recommended to delay piercing until after 10 years of age.
Patch testing for nickel sensitivity is unreliable in infants and toddlers and
should only be performed if there is high clinical suspicion.
Shoe dermatitis typically affects the dorsum or soles of the feet and
toes, sparing the interdigital spaces; it is usually symmetric. Other
forms of allergic contact dermatitis, in contrast to irritant dermatitis,
rarely involve the palms and soles. Common allergens are the antioxidants and accelerators in shoe rubber, adhesives, and the chromium
salts in tanned leather or shoe dyes. Excessive sweating often leaches
these substances from their source.
Apparel contains a number of sensitizers, including dyes, dye fixative,
fabric finishes, fibers, resins, and cleaning solutions. Dye may be poorly

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4090 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 696.4 Linear lesions in poison ivy.

Topical medications and cosmetics may be unsuspected as allergens, particularly if a medication is being used for a preexisting dermatitis. The most common offenders are neomycin, topical antihistamines,
topical anesthetics, fragrances, topical corticosteroids, oxybenzone and
octocrylene in chemical sunscreens, preservatives, dye in temporary tattoos, and ethylenediamine, a stabilizer present in many medications. All
types of cosmetics can cause facial dermatitis; involvement of the eyelids
is characteristic for nail polish sensitivity. Another pediatric allergen has
been methylisothiazolinone (MI), a chemical preservative found in rinse-­
off products including liquid soaps and shampoos, as well as paints and
glues, which may be used in making homemade “slime” and lead to hand
dermatitis.
Neomycin sulfate is present in many nonprescription topical antibiotic
preparations, and thus children are frequently exposed at an early age. It is
one of the most common causes of allergic contact dermatitis, and use of
combination products of neomycin with other antibiotics, antifungals, or
corticosteroids may induce co-­reactivity with these chemically unrelated
substances.
As mentioned previously, diagnosis of allergic contact dermatitis is usually based on history; however, patch testing may be helpful, especially in
older children. Identification and avoidance of the offending agent is the
mainstay of managing allergic contact dermatitis. First-­line treatment for
acute eruption is a mid-­potency topical corticosteroid ointment for 2-­3
weeks and symptom management with nonsensitizing and fragrance-­
free emollients/moisturizers, wet dressings, and sedating antihistamines
to allow for sleep. Systemic corticosteroids are used when >10% of skin is
involved (0.5-­1.0 mg/kg prednisone to a maximum of 60 mg/day for 7-­10
days, followed by a 7-­10 day taper). More chronic allergic contact dermatitis
is treated with low-­to mid-­potency topical corticosteroids. Desensitization
therapy is rarely indicated. Topical calcineurin inhibitors, such as tacrolimus, may be a potential steroid-­sparing alternative agent in select patients.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

696.2 Nummular Eczema
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu
Nummular eczema is characterized by coin-­shaped, severely pruritic,
eczematous plaques, commonly involving the extensor surfaces of the
extremities (Fig. 696.6), buttocks, and shoulders with facial sparing. The
plaques are relatively discrete, boggy, vesicular, slightly scaly, and exudative; when chronic, they often become thickened and lichenified and may
develop central clearing. Nummular eczema may be an atypical morphology in someone with underlying atopic dermatitis or may be an independent disorder. Flares are generally sporadic but may be precipitated
by xerosis, irritants, allergens, or occult staphylococcal infection. Most
frequently, these lesions are mistaken for tinea corporis, but plaques of
nummular eczema are distinguished by the lack of a raised, sharply circumscribed border, the lack of fungal organisms on a potassium hydroxide (KOH) preparation, and frequent weeping or bleeding when scraped.
First-­line treatment is with emollients, wet dressings, and potent topical
corticosteroids. Steroid-­impregnated tapes may simultaneously treat and
provide barrier protection to these circumscribed eczematous plaques. An
oral antihistamine may be helpful, particularly a sedating antihistamine at
night. Antibiotics are indicated for secondary infection. Methotrexate and
dupilumab have been described as systemic treatments.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 696.5 Chronic periumbilical nickel dermatitis.
fixed to clothing and so may be leached out with sweating, as can partially cured formaldehyde resins. The elastic in garments is a frequent
cause of clothing dermatitis, and contact allergy to the ink “tag” of tagless
baby clothing has been reported. Exposure to other items with fabric,
such as infant car seats, may induce reactions similar to clothing.

696.3 Pityriasis Alba
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu
Pityriasis alba occurs mainly in children and causes lesions that are
hypopigmented, ill-­defined, round or oval patches (Fig. 696.7). They
may be mildly erythematous and finely scaly. Lesions occur on the face,
neck, upper trunk, and proximal portions of the arms and are most pronounced on darker skin tones or after tanning of surrounding skin. Itching

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 696 u Eczematous Disorders

Fig. 696.6 Discrete, boggy plaque of nummular dermatitis.
is minimal or absent. The cause is unknown, but the eruption appears to
be exacerbated by dryness and is often regarded as a mild form of atopic
dermatitis. Pityriasis alba is frequently misdiagnosed as vitiligo, tinea versicolor, or tinea corporis. The lesions wax and wane but eventually disappear, and normal pigmentation often takes months to return. Application
of a lubricant or emollient may ameliorate the condition, and avoidance of
sun exposure and daily sunscreen use can help reduce the appearance of
existing lesions by allowing for natural lightening of adjacent unaffected
skin. If pruritus is troublesome or if the lesions are active with erythema
and fine scale, a low-­potency topical steroid or calcineurin inhibitor may
be used.

4091

Fig. 696.7 Patchy hypopigmented lesions with diffuse borders characteristic of pityriasis alba.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

696.4 Lichen Simplex Chronicus
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu
Lichen simplex chronicus is a secondary skin disorder resulting from
excessive scratching or rubbing. It is characterized by a chronic pruritic,
eczematous, circumscribed plaque that is usually lichenified and hyperpigmented (Fig. 696.8). All affected areas must be accessible to scratching, with the most common sites being the posterior neck, genitalia,
wrists, ankles, and dorsal feet. Although the initiating event may be a
transient lesion such as an insect bite, trauma from rubbing and scratching accounts for persistence of the plaque. Lichen simplex chronicus may
also be seen in other chronic eczematous dermatoses such as atopic dermatitis, typically when poorly controlled. Pruritus must be controlled to
permit healing; thus a covering to prevent scratching may be necessary.
A high-­potency topical corticosteroid under occlusion is often helpful
and hastens resolution. Second-­line therapy includes adding 6% salicylic
acid gel to the topical corticosteroid preparation.

696.5 Acute Palmoplantar Eczema
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu
A recurrent, sometimes seasonal, blistering disorder of the hands and
feet, acute palmoplantar eczema (also known as dyshidrotic eczema or
pompholyx) occurs in all age-­groups but is uncommon in infancy. The
pathogenesis is unknown, although possible predisposing factors include
a history of atopy, exposure to contact allergens (especially metals) or
irritants, or IV immunoglobulin therapy. The disease is characterized by
recurrent crops of small, deep-­seated, “tapioca-­like” vesicles, which are
intensely pruritic and may coalesce into tense bullae (Fig. 696.9). Sites
of predilection are the palms, soles, and lateral aspects of the fingers
and toes. Primary lesions are noninflammatory and are filled with clear
fluid, which, unlike sweat, has a physiologic pH and contains protein.
Maceration and secondary infection are frequent because of scratching.
The chronic phase is characterized by thickened, fissured plaques that
may cause considerable discomfort and dystrophic nails. Although acute

Fig. 696.8 Thickened plaque of lichen simplex chronicus.
palmoplantar eczema is frequently seen in patients with hyperhidrosis,
histologic examination reveals an eczematous reaction around sweat
ducts, without any structural or functional abnormalities of the sweat
ducts themselves. The diagnosis is made clinically. The disorder may be
confused with allergic contact dermatitis, which usually affects the dorsal rather than the volar surfaces, and with dermatophytosis, which can
be distinguished by a KOH preparation of the roof of a vesicle and by
appropriate cultures.
Acute palmoplantar eczema responds to wet dressings, liberal emollient use, and potent topical corticosteroid ointment applied twice daily
for 2-­4 weeks. Weeping skin benefits from twice-­daily soaking in an
astringent solution, such as aluminum subacetate. Second-­line treatment includes phototherapy and systemic immunomodulators. Severe
disease may require oral corticosteroids with a 2-­week taper. Secondary bacterial infection should be treated systemically with an appropriate antibiotic. Patients should be told to expect recurrence and should
protect their hands and feet from the damaging effects of excessive
sweating, chemicals, harsh soaps, and adverse weather. Unfortunately,
it is impossible to prevent recurrence or to predict its frequency.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

696.6 Seborrheic Dermatitis
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu

ETIOLOGY

Seborrheic dermatitis is a chronic inflammatory disease most common in
infancy and adolescence that parallels the distribution, size, and activity of
the sebaceous glands. The cause is unknown, as is the role of the sebaceous
glands in the disease. Malassezia furfur is implicated as a causative agent,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4092 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 696.9 Vesicular palmar lesions of acute palmoplantar eczema
with large bullae.

Fig. 696.10 Cradle cap in an infant.

although it remains unclear whether dermatitis results from the action of
the fungus, its by-­products, or an exaggerated response of the host. In adolescence, seborrheic dermatitis typically occurs after puberty, indicating a
possible role for sex hormones.
It is also unknown whether infantile seborrheic dermatitis and adolescent seborrheic dermatitis are the same or different entities. There
is no evidence that children with infantile seborrheic dermatitis will
experience seborrheic dermatitis as adolescents.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The disorder may begin in the first month of life and typically self-­resolves
by 1 year. Diffuse or focal scaling and crusting of the scalp, sometimes
called cradle cap (Fig. 696.10), may be the initial and, at times the only,
manifestation. A greasy, scaly, erythematous papular dermatitis, which
is usually nonpruritic in infants, may involve the face, neck, retroauricular areas, axillae, umbilicus, and diaper area. The dermatitis may be
patchy and focal or may spread to involve almost the entire body (Fig.
696.11). Postinflammatory pigmentary changes are common, particularly in infants with darker skin. When the scaling becomes pronounced,
the condition may resemble psoriasis and, at times, can be distinguished
only with difficulty. The possibility of coexistent atopic dermatitis must
be considered when there is an acute weeping dermatitis with pruritus,
and the two are often clinically inseparable at an early age. An intractable
seborrhea-­like dermatitis with chronic diarrhea and failure to thrive may
reflect systemic dysfunction of the immune system. A chronic treatment-­
resistant seborrhea-­like pattern may also result from cutaneous histiocytic
infiltrates in infants with Langerhans cell histiocytosis. Seborrheic dermatitis is a common cutaneous manifestation of AIDS in young adults and is
characterized by thick, greasy scales on the scalp and large hyperkeratotic
erythematous plaques on the face, chest, and genitals.
During adolescence, seborrheic dermatitis is more localized and may
be confined to the scalp, chest, and intertriginous areas. Also noted
may be marginal blepharitis and involvement of the external auditory
canal. Scalp changes vary from diffuse, brawny scaling to focal areas
of thick, oily, yellow crusts with underlying erythema. Loss of hair is
uncommon, and pruritus may be absent to marked. When the dermatitis is severe, erythema and scaling occur at the frontal hairline, the
medial aspects of the eyebrows, and in the nasolabial and retroauricular folds. Red, scaly plaques may appear in the axillae, inguinal region,
gluteal cleft, and umbilicus. On the extremities, seborrheic plaques may
be more eczematous and less erythematous and demarcated. Unlike
infantile seborrheic dermatitis, adolescent seborrheic dermatitis generally does not self-­resolve and has a chronic relapsing course.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis of seborrheic dermatitis includes psoriasis,
atopic dermatitis, dermatophytosis, Langerhans cell histiocytosis, and
candidiasis. Secondary bacterial infections and superimposed candidiasis are common.

TREATMENT

Initial management for infantile seborrheic dermatitis is generally conservative given the self-­limited nature of this condition.

Fig. 696.11 Seborrheic dermatitis may occasionally be more wide-

spread. (From Tom WL, Eichenfield LF. Eczematous disorders. In:
Eichenfield LF, Frieden IJ, eds. Neonatal and Infant Dermatology, 3rd
ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015: Fig. 15.11, p. 225.)

Emollients, baby oil, gentle shampooing with nonmedicated baby
shampoo, and gentle use of a soft brush to remove scales are usually effective measures. Persistent lesions may be treated with low-­
potency topical corticosteroids if inflamed (applied once daily for 1
week) and a topical antifungal (e.g., ketoconazole 2% cream twice
daily). Antifungal shampoos such as ketoconazole 2% shampoo
should be used cautiously because they are not tear-­free.
First-­line therapy for children and adolescents with scalp seborrheic dermatitis is antifungal shampoo used several times weekly
to daily (selenium sulfide, ketoconazole, ciclopirox, zinc pyrithione, salicylic acid, or tar). Mid-­
potency topical corticosteroids
such as fluocinolone 0.01% oil or triamcinolone 0.1% lotion may
also be used for inflamed lesions, applied once daily for 2-­4 weeks.
Nonscalp lesions are treated with topical corticosteroid cream
(low-­potency for facial lesions, mid-­potency elsewhere), as well
as topical antifungals such as ketoconazole 2% cream or ketoconazole 2% shampoo used as a body or face wash. Second-­line therapy
for seborrheic dermatitis includes topical calcineurin inhibitors
and keratolytic agents such as urea. Severe adult cases improve
with oral antifungal agents; however, pediatric studies are lacking.
Once acute disease is controlled, antifungal shampoo used on a
twice-­weekly basis is effective maintenance to reduce the risk of
relapse.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 697 u Photosensitivity

Chapter 697

Photosensitivity
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu
Photosensitivity denotes an abnormal cutaneous reaction to UV radiation, either in sunlight or artificial light. The UV light spectrum contains UVA (320-­400 nm wavelength), UVB (290-­320 nm wavelength),
and UVC (100-­290 nm wavelength) subtypes. Transmitted radiation
<300 nm is largely absorbed in the epidermis, whereas >300 nm is
mostly transmitted to the dermis after variable epidermal melanin
absorption. Children vary in susceptibility to UV radiation, depending
on their skin type (i.e., its amount of pigment; Table 697.1).

ACUTE SUNBURN REACTION

The most common photosensitive reaction seen in children is acute
sunburn, which is caused mainly by UVB radiation. Sunlight contains many times more UVA than UVB radiation, but UVA must be
encountered in much larger quantities than UVB radiation to produce
sunburn. Immediate pigment darkening is caused by UVA radiation–
induced photo-­oxidative darkening of existing melanin and its transfer from melanocytes to keratinocytes. This effect generally lasts for
a few hours and is not photoprotective. UVB-­induced effects appear
6-­12 hours after initial exposure and reach a peak in 24 hours. Effects
include redness, tenderness, edema, and blistering (Fig. 697.1). Severe
sunburn induces systemic symptoms of fever, nausea, and headache.
Reactive oxidation species generated by UVB induce keratinocyte
membrane damage and are involved in the pathogenesis of sunburn.
A portion of the vasodilation seen in UVB-­induced erythema is mediated by prostaglandins E2, E3, and F2A. Other inflammatory cytokines
induced by UVB include interleukins 1, 6, and 8 and tumor necrosis
factor-­α. Acute sunburn is a self-­limited condition that resolves within
1 week with desquamation and without scarring. Delayed melanogenesis as a result of UVB radiation begins in 2-­3 days and lasts several days
to a few weeks. Manufacture of new melanin in melanocytes, transfer of melanin from melanocytes to keratinocytes, increase in size and
arborization of melanocytes, and activation of quiescent melanocytes
produce delayed melanogenesis and pigment darkening (tanning).
This effect reduces skin sensitivity to future UV-­induced erythema. The
amount of protection afforded depends on the skin type of the patient.
Additional effects and possible complications of sun exposure include
increased thickness of the stratum corneum, recurrence or exacerbation of herpes simplex labialis, lupus erythematosus, and many other
conditions (Table 697.2).
Acute sunburn should be managed conservatively with cool compresses, aloe vera products, and calamine lotion. Oral analgesics such
as ibuprofen and acetaminophen may decrease pain. Topical corticosteroids are only helpful in the acute phase and generally should not
Table 697.1  Sun-­Reactive Skin Types
FITZPATRICK SKIN TYPE

SUNBURN, TANNING HISTORY

I

Always burns easily, no tanning

II

Usually burns, minimal tanning

III

Sometimes burns, gradual light
brown tan

IV

Minimal to no burning, always tans

V

Rarely burns, tans profusely dark
brown

VI

Never burns, pigmented black

4093

be used to treat sunburn once peak erythema has been reached (∼24
hours). Topical anesthetics are relatively ineffective and potentially
hazardous because of their propensity to cause contact dermatitis. A
bland emollient, such as plain petrolatum, is effective in the desquamative phase.
The long-­term sequelae of chronic and intense sun exposure are
not often seen in children, but most individuals receive >50% of their
lifetime UV dose by age 20 years; therefore pediatricians have a pivotal role in educating patients and their parents about the harmful
effects, potential malignancy risks, and irreversible skin damage that
result from prolonged exposure to the sun and tanning lights. Premature aging, senile elastosis, actinic keratoses, squamous and basal cell
carcinomas, and melanomas all occur with greater frequency in sun-­
damaged skin. In particular, blistering sunburns in childhood and adolescence significantly increase the risk for development of malignant
melanoma.
Sun protection is best achieved by sun avoidance, which includes
minimizing time in the midday sun (10 am to 4 pm), staying in the
shade, and wearing protective clothing including wide-­brimmed hats.
Protection is enhanced by a wide variety of sunscreen agents. Physical sunscreens (zinc oxide, titanium dioxide) that block UV light are
preferred, whereas chemical sunscreens (para-­
aminobenzoic acid
[PABA], PABA esters, salicylates, benzophenones, avobenzone, cinnamates, and ecamsule) absorb damaging radiation. Some of these
products may be systemically absorbed and achieve levels higher than
permitted by the FDA. Most chemical sunscreens are effective for only
UVB wavelengths but benzophenones and avobenzone provide protection in both the UVA and UVB ranges; ecamsule is a UVA sunscreen.
Stabilizers such as octocrylene and diethyl 2,6-­naphthalate increase the
time of function of the chemical sunscreens. “Broad-­spectrum” sunscreens are combination products that absorb both UVA and UVB, and
families should be advised to use products labeled as “broad spectrum”
with a sun protective factor (SPF) of at least 30, reapply liberally at least
every 2 hours while outdoors, and reapply after swimming. Infants
younger than 6 months of age should not be exposed to direct sunlight
but may have SPF 15 physical sunscreens applied to small areas of skin
if sunlight avoidance is not possible. SPF is defined as the minimal dose
of sunlight required to produce cutaneous erythema after application
of a sunscreen, divided by the dose required with no use of sunscreen.
SPF applies only to UVB protection; there is no associated rating for
UVA protection in the United States aside from the “broad spectrum”
designation.

PHOTOSENSITIVE REACTIONS

Photosensitizers in combination with a particular wavelength of light
(typically UVA) cause dermatitis that can be classified as phototoxic or
photoallergic reactions. Contact with the photosensitizer may occur
externally on the skin, internally by enteral or parenteral administration, or through host synthesis of photosensitizers in response to an
administered drug.
Photoallergic reactions occur in only a small percentage of persons
exposed to photosensitizers and light and require a time interval for
sensitization to take place. Thereafter, dermatitis appears within 24
hours of reexposure to the photosensitizer and light. Typically, patients
present with an eczematous eruption in sun-­exposed areas with sparing
behind the ear, under the chin, and under clothing. Photoallergic dermatitis is a T-­cell–mediated delayed hypersensitivity reaction in which
the drug, acting as a hapten, may combine with a skin protein to form
the antigenic substance. Table 697.2 lists some of the important classes
of drugs and chemicals responsible for photosensitivity reactions. The
most common photoallergens are chemicals present in sunscreens.
Phototoxic reactions occur in all individuals who accumulate adequate amounts of a photosensitizing drug or chemical within the skin.
UV radiation excites the agent to a state capable of causing cell or tissue damage through reactive oxygen species formation. Prior sensitization is not required. Dermatitis develops within hours after exposure
to radiation in the range of 285-­450 nm. The eruption is confined to
light-­exposed areas and often resembles exaggerated sunburn, but it

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4094 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 697.2  Cutaneous Reactions to Sunlight
Sunburn
Photoallergic Drug Eruptions
• Systemic drugs include tetracyclines, psoralens, chlorothiazides,
sulfonamides, barbiturates, griseofulvin, thiazides, quinidine,
phenothiazines
• Topical agents include coal tar derivatives, psoralens,
halogenated salicylanilides (soaps), perfume oils (e.g., oil of
bergamot), sunscreens (e.g., PABA, cinnamates, benzophenones)

Fig. 697.1 Sunburn. Well-­demarcated, severe erythema.
may be urticarial or bullous. It results in postinflammatory hyperpigmentation. All the drugs that cause photoallergic reactions may also
cause a phototoxic dermatitis if given in sufficiently high doses. Several
additional drugs and contactants cause phototoxic reactions (see Table
697.2). Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation develops rapidly and can
be the presenting sign. Contact with furocoumarin-­containing plants
causes a nonallergic disorder called phytophotodermatitis (Figs. 697.2
and 697.3). The most common phytophotodermatitis seen in children
is caused by lime juice, which presents as hyperpigmentation in streaky
patterns on sun-­exposed skin consistent with dripping juice or handprints (see Table 697.2).
Diagnosis of photosensitive reactions caused by drugs or chemicals
relies on a high index of suspicion, an appreciation of the distribution
pattern of the eruption, and a history of application or ingestion of a
known photosensitizing agent. Phototesting and photopatch testing are
also helpful when available. First-­line treatment for both photoallergy
and phototoxicity consists of discontinuation of the offending agent and
good sun protection practices, including avoidance of sun exposure.
Photoallergic reactions are treated similarly to contact dermatitis, with
a topical corticosteroid to alleviate pruritus when necessary. Severe reactions may necessitate a 2-­to 3-­week course of systemic corticosteroid
therapy. Phototoxic reactions are treated similarly to sunburn, with comfort measures such as cool compresses, emollients, and oral analgesics.

PORPHYRIAS

See Chapter 112.
Porphyrias are acquired or inborn disorders due to genetic variants
of specific enzymes in the heme biosynthetic pathway. Some have childhood photosensitivity as a consistent feature. The pathogenesis of photosensitivity in porphyria relates to deposition of excess porphyrins in
the skin; UV radiation excites these molecules, causing cell and tissue
damage via generation of reactive oxygen species. Signs and symptoms
may be negligible during the winter, when sun exposure is minimal.
Congenital erythropoietic porphyria (Günther disease) is a rare
autosomal recessive disorder affecting the enzyme uroporphyrinogen
III synthase. It may cause hydrops fetalis, but more typically manifests in the first few months of life as hemolytic anemia and exquisite
sensitivity to light, which may induce repeated severe bullous eruptions that result in mutilating scars (Fig. 697.4). Hyperpigmentation,
hyperkeratosis, vesiculation, and fragility of skin, as well as various nail
changes, develop in light-­exposed areas. Light therapy for an affected
neonate presenting with jaundice may inadvertently induce skin manifestations. Hirsutism in areas of mild involvement, scarring alopecia
in severely affected areas, pink to red urine, brown teeth (erythrodontia), splenomegaly, and corneal ulceration are additional characteristic
manifestations. Laboratory findings include uroporphyrin I and coproporphyrin I in urine, plasma, and erythrocytes and coproporphyrin I
in feces. Teeth and urine from affected patients fluoresce reddish pink
under a Wood lamp as a result of the presence of porphyrins. Hepatoerythropoietic porphyria, a separate entity, has skin findings that
closely resemble those seen in congenital erythropoietic porphyria; this
extremely rare disorder presents in early childhood and is discussed in
greater depth in Chapter 112.

Phototoxic Drug Eruptions
• Systemic agents include nalidixic acid, furosemide, nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory agents (naproxen, piroxicam), and high doses of
agents causing photoallergic eruptions
• Topical agents include 5-­fluorouracial, furocoumarins and high
doses of agents causing photoallergic eruptions
Phytophotodermatosis
• Furocoumarin-­containing plants: fig tree leaves and sap, limes,
celery, fennel, carrots, parsley, dill, parsnips
Genetic Disorders with Photosensitivity
• Xeroderma pigmentosum
• Bloom syndrome
• Cockayne syndrome
• Rothmund-­Thomson syndrome
• Trichothiodystrophy
• Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome
• Kindler syndrome
Inborn Errors of Metabolism
• Porphyrias
• Hartnup disease and pellagra
Infectious Diseases Associated with Photosensitivity
• Recurrent herpes simplex infection
• Viral exanthems (accentuated photodistribution; e.g., varicella)
Skin Diseases Exacerbated or Precipitated by Light
• Lichen planus
• Darier disease
• Lupus erythematosus, including neonatal
• Dermatomyositis
• Psoriasis
• Erythema multiforme
• Atopic dermatitis
• Hailey-­Hailey disease
Deficient Protection Because of a Lack of Pigment
• Vitiligo
• Oculocutaneous albinism
• Phenylketonuria
• Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome
• Hermansky-­Pudlak syndrome
• Waardenburg syndrome
• Piebaldism
PABA, para-­aminobenzoic acid.

Erythropoietic protoporphyria may be autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, or X-­linked and most commonly involves the enzyme
ferrochelatase (FECH), the final enzyme in the heme synthetic pathway. Symptoms develop in early childhood and manifest as intense
pain, tingling, or pruritus within 30 minutes of sun exposure, followed
by erythema, edema, urticaria, or mild systemic symptoms; these
acute manifestations resolve completely within days. The absence of
blistering distinguishes erythropoietic protoporphyria from the other
cutaneous porphyrias. Nail changes consist of opacification of the nail
plate, onycholysis, pain, and tenderness. Recurrent sun exposure produces a subtle chronic eczematous dermatitis with thickened, lichenified skin, especially over the finger joints (Fig. 697.5A), as well as mild
facial scarring (see Fig. 697.5B). Pigmentation, hypertrichosis, skin fragility, and mutilation are not seen. Gallstones develop frequently; however, severe liver disease occurs in <5% of patients. Protoporphyrin is
detected in plasma, erythrocytes, and feces. X-­linked protoporphyria

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 697 u Photosensitivity
is a similar disorder to erythropoietic protoporphyria but is due to a
pathogenic genetic variant in 5-­aminolevulinic acid synthetase (the
first and rate-­controlling enzyme of heme synthesis) and therefore does
not have iron overload or associated anemia.
The wavelengths of light mainly responsible for eliciting cutaneous
reactions in porphyria are in the region of 400 nm (UVA light). Window
glass, including that in automobiles, transmits wavelengths >320 nm
and is not protective, and fluorescent indoor lights may be pathogenic.
Patients must avoid direct sunlight, wear protective clothing, and use
a sunscreen agent that effectively blocks UVA light. Oral beta-­carotene
also provides some photoprotective benefit. Afamelanotide, an alpha-­
melanocyte–stimulating hormone (α-­MSH) analog, is approved by the
FDA for treatment of erythropoietic protoporphyria to increase pain-­
free light exposure. This drug serves to increase skin pigmentation by
increasing melanin production by melanocytes, resulting in increased
UV tolerance.
Cutaneous porphyria symptoms are typically constant throughout
life, and secondary bacterial infections commonly complicate the disease course. Cutaneous porphyrias do not appear to increase the risk
for skin malignancies. Additional diagnostic and treatment recommendations for the porphyrias are outlined in Chapter 112.

4095

Pseudoporphyria is a porphyria-­like reaction characterized by erythema, blistering, and scarring on sun-­exposed skin seen occasionally
in patients with juvenile idiopathic arthritis taking nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents.

COLLOID MILIUM

Colloid milium is a rare, asymptomatic disorder that occurs on the face
(nose, upper lip, and upper cheeks) and may extend to the dorsum of
the hands and the neck as a profuse eruption of tiny, ivory to yellow,
firm, grouped papules. Lesions appear before puberty on otherwise
normal skin, unlike the adult variant that develops on sun-­damaged
skin. Onset may follow an acute sunburn or long-­term sun exposure. Most cases reach maximal severity within 3 years and remain
unchanged thereafter, although the condition may remit spontaneously
after puberty. Treatment is usually not necessary.

HYDROA VACCINIFORME

Hydroa vacciniforme is a vesiculobullous disorder with unclear etiology, although chronic or latent Epstein-­Barr virus infections or lymphoproliferative disorders have been implicated. It begins in early
childhood and may remit at puberty, with peak incidence in the spring
and summer. Erythematous, pruritic macules develop symmetrically
within hours of sun exposure over the ears, nose, lips, cheeks, and dorsal
surfaces of the hands and forearms. Lesions progress to stinging tender
papules and hemorrhagic vesicles and bullae, resembling chickenpox.
They become umbilicated, ulcerated, and crusted, eventually healing
with pitted scars and telangiectasias. Associated features are rare but
include fever, malaise, hypersensitivity to mosquito bites, conjunctivitis, and other ocular symptoms. This eruption should be distinguished

Fig. 697.2 Phytophotodermatitis (fig tree leaves). (From Papazoglou A, Mantadakis E. Fig tree leaves phytophotodermatitis. J Pediatr.
2021;239:244–245, Fig.1A.)

Fig. 697.4 Crusted ulcerations in an infant with congenital erythropoietic porphyria.

Fig. 697.3 Phytophotodermatitis

A

B

(lime). A, Linear hyperpigmentation on the left cheek. B, A linear
streak of hyperpigmentation on
the right dorsal hand along with
irregular hyperpigmentation of
the bilateral dorsal fingers. (From
Dreher K, Evans MS. Linear hyperpigmentation in chronic phytophotodermatitis from limes. J Pediatr.
2021;239:245–246.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4096 Part XXIX u The Skin

A
Fig. 697.6 Urticaria after 5 min of exposure to artificial ultraviolet A
radiation.

B
Fig. 697.5 Erythropoietic protoporphyria. A, Erythematous thicken-

ing over the metacarpal phalangeal joints. B, Linear crusts and scarring.

from erythropoietic protoporphyria, which rarely shows vesicles. Typical lesions have been reproduced with repeated doses of UVA or UVB
light. First-­line treatment includes sun avoidance, broad-­spectrum
sunscreens, and other sun-­protective habits. Other potential therapies
include mid-­potency topical corticosteroids for inflamed lesions, low-­
dose courses of narrow-­band UVB (NB-­UVB) therapy, beta-­carotene,
hydroxychloroquine, or antiviral agents such as acyclovir.

SOLAR URTICARIA

Solar urticaria is a rare disorder induced by UV or visible irradiation.
The disorder is mediated by immunoglobulin E antibodies to either an
abnormal photoallergen present only in affected patients (type I) or a
normal photoallergen ordinarily present in skin (type II), leading to
mast cell degranulation and histamine release. Classic urticarial lesions
consisting of erythematous pruritic wheals develop on sun-­exposed
skin (Fig. 697.6) within 5-­10 minutes of sun exposure and fade within
24 hours. Severe reactions involving large areas of skin may lead to systemic symptoms or anaphylaxis. Diagnosis is achieved by history alone
or with phototesting. First-­line treatment is an oral H1 antihistamine,
plus sun avoidance and protection. Second-­line therapy possibilities
include oral or topical corticosteroids, photodesensitization using NB-­
UVB, omalizumab, or intravenous immunoglobulin.

POLYMORPHOUS LIGHT ERUPTION

Polymorphous light eruption (PMLE) is a common photosensitivity
reaction that develops most commonly in females. The first eruption
typically appears in the spring after the first episode of prolonged sun
exposure of the season. Onset of the eruption is delayed by hours to
days after sun exposure and lasts for days to sometimes weeks. PMLE
usually resolves with increased sun exposure throughout the spring
and summer. Areas of involvement tend to be symmetric and are characteristic for a given patient, including some, but not all, of the exposed
or lightly covered skin on the face, neck, upper chest, and distal
extremities. Lesions have various morphologies but most commonly
are pruritic, 2-­to 5-­mm, grouped, erythematous papules or papulovesicles or >5-­cm edematous plaques; lesions are nonscarring. A PMLE
variant known as juvenile spring eruption characteristically occurs

on affected boys’ ears each spring, and pinpoint papular PMLE is a
variant characterized by pinpoint-­sized lesions occurring in darker-­
skinned individuals. Most PMLE cases involve sensitivity to UVA
radiation, although some are UVB induced. PMLE most likely results
from a delayed-­type hypersensitivity reaction to a photo-­induced antigen within the skin, with individuals having a genetic predisposition.
Provocative phototesting, as well as skin biopsy (showing epidermal
spongiosis and superficial and deep lymphocytic infiltrate), aid in diagnosis. Treatment is aimed at prevention with sun avoidance, protective clothing, and broad-­spectrum sunscreens. Topical corticosteroids
(low-­potency for facial lesions, high-­potency for lesions elsewhere) can
be used for mild eruptions. Second-­line approaches include prophylactic NB-­UVB phototherapy or hydroxychloroquine in early spring and
short-­course systemic glucocorticoids for severe flares.

ACTINIC PRURIGO

Actinic prurigo, often classified as a variant of PMLE, is a chronic
familial photodermatitis inherited as an autosomal dominant trait seen
most commonly in Native Americans of North and South America.
Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) DRB1*0407 (60–70%) and HLA
DRB1*0401 (20%) are strongly associated with actinic prurigo. Most
patients are female and are sensitive to UVA radiation. The first episode generally occurs in early childhood, several hours to 2 days after
intense sun exposure. The papulonodular lesions are intensely pruritic, erythematous, and crusted. Areas of predilection include the face
(Fig. 697.7), lower lip, distal extremities, and, in severe cases, buttocks.
Facial lesions may heal with minute pitted or linear scarring. Lesions
often become chronic, without periods of total clearing, merging into
eczematous plaques that become lichenified and occasionally secondarily infected. Associated features that distinguish this disorder from
other photoeruptions and atopic dermatitis include cheilitis, conjunctivitis, and traumatic alopecia of the outer half of the eyebrows. Actinic
prurigo is a chronic condition that generally persists into adult life,
although it may improve spontaneously in the late teenage years. Sun
avoidance, protective clothing, and broad-­spectrum sunscreens may be
helpful in preventing the eruption. Mid-­to high-­potency topical corticosteroids and antihistamines palliate the pruritus and inflammation.
Severe acute eruptions may require oral glucocorticoids. Treatment
with NB-­UVB beginning in springtime has shown improved tolerance
of sunlight during summer months; however, it may induce symptoms
in some patients. Thalidomide 50-­100 mg/day is very effective, but its
use is limited by toxicity, especially severe birth defects when taken by
pregnant females. Dupilumab is described in case reports to be helpful.

COCKAYNE SYNDROME

Cockayne syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder. Onset
occurs at 1 year of age and is characterized by facial erythema in a butterfly distribution after sun exposure. Later characteristics include loss
of adipose tissue and development of thin, atrophic, hyperpigmented

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 697 u Photosensitivity

Fig. 697.7 Erythematous, excoriated papules in actinic prurigo.
skin, particularly over the face. Associated features include stunted
growth; dwarfism; microcephaly; progressive neurologic dysfunction
(caused by leukodystrophy); mental retardation; progressive dementia;
distinct facies (aged look, pinched nose, sunken eyes, large protuberant
ears); long limbs; disproportionately large hands and feet; cool and cyanotic extremities; carious teeth; unsteady gait with tremor; limitation
of joint mobility; progressive deafness; cataracts; retinal degeneration;
optic atrophy; decreased sweating and tearing; and premature graying
of the hair. Complications include diabetes and hepatic or renal impairment. Diffuse extensive demyelination of the peripheral and central
nervous systems ensues, and patients generally die of atheromatous
vascular disease or infections (especially pneumonia) before the third
decade. There are two types of Cockayne syndrome. Type I (CSA gene)
is less severe than type II (CSB gene). Patients may have xeroderma
pigmentosum–Cockayne syndrome overlap, which is phenotypically
more like Cockayne syndrome and is due to genetic variants in XPB,
XPD, or XPG genes. Photosensitivity in Cockayne syndrome is a result
of deficient nucleotide excision repair of UV-­induced damage, specifically within actively transcribing regions of DNA (transcription-­
coupled DNA repair). The etiology of neurologic and other associated
features remains unclear; however, evidence points toward a mitochondriopathy. The syndrome is distinguished from progeria (see Chapter
111) by the presence of photosensitivity and ocular abnormalities and
from xeroderma pigmentosum by the fact that patients with Cockayne
syndrome do not develop sun-­induced pigmentation or increased risk
of skin cancers. Diagnosis is accomplished by genetic testing and performing various tests on cultured fibroblasts. The mainstay of treatment for the photosensitivity of Cockayne syndrome is strict sunlight
avoidance and protective measures.

XERODERMA PIGMENTOSUM

Xeroderma pigmentosum is a rare autosomal recessive disorder that
results from a defect in nucleotide excision repair. Eight genetic
groups have been recognized on the basis of each group’s separate
defect in ability to repair (xeroderma pigmentosum A through G) or
replicate (xeroderma pigmentosum V [variant]) damaged DNA. The
wavelength of light that induces the DNA damage ranges from 280
to 340 nm. Skin changes are first noted during infancy or early childhood in sun-­exposed areas, though lesions may occur at other sites,
including the scalp. The skin lesions consist of erythema, scaling,
bullae, crusting, ephelides (freckles), telangiectasia, keratoses (Fig.
697.8), basal and squamous cell carcinomas, and malignant melanomas. Interestingly, although most patients experience exaggerated
acute sunburn reactions after minimal UV exposure, up to half of
affected patients do not and instead develop progressive freckling.
This difference in presentation depends on genetic subtype. Ocular
manifestations include photophobia, lacrimation, blepharitis, symblepharon, keratitis, corneal opacities, tumors of the lids, and possible eventual blindness. Neurologic abnormalities such as cognitive
deterioration and sensorineural deafness develop in approximately
20% of patients.

4097

Fig. 697.8 Dyspigmentation and actinic keratoses in child with xeroderma pigmentosum.

This disease is a serious mutilating disorder, and the life span
of an affected patient is often brief. Affected families should have
genetic counseling. Xeroderma pigmentosum is detectable in cells
cultured from amniotic fluid or DNA analysis of chorionic villous
samples. Cultured skin fibroblast tests and genetic testing after
birth also confirm diagnosis. Affected children should be totally
protected from sun exposure; protective clothing, sunglasses, and
opaque broad-­spectrum sunscreens should be used even for mildly
affected children. Light from unshielded fluorescent bulbs and sunlight passing through glass windows (including vehicle windows)
are also harmful; thus applied window films are recommended.
Early detection and removal of malignancies is mandatory, and oral
isotretinoin may be used to prevent nonmelanoma skin cancers.
Average age of death of these patients is 32 years. There is crossover
between several subtypes of xeroderma pigmentosum and both
Cockayne syndrome and trichothiodystrophy.

ROTHMUND-­THOMSON SYNDROME

Rothmund-­Thomson syndrome is also known as poikiloderma
congenitale because of the striking skin changes (Fig. 697.9). It is
inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. Pathogenic genetic variants in the RECQL4 gene, which encodes a DNA helicase involved
in repair and replication of DNA and telomeres, are found in
approximately 65% of patients. The other genetic variants causing
Rothmund-­Thomson syndrome are unknown. Skin changes are
noted as early as 3 months of age and begin on the face. Plaques of
erythema and edema appear in a butterfly distribution and on the
forehead, ears, neck, dorsal portions of the hands, extensor surfaces
of the arms, and buttocks. These are replaced gradually by poikiloderma (reticulated, atrophic, hyperpigmented, and hypopigmented
telangiectatic patches or plaques). Palmoplantar hyperkeratosis
develops in one third of patients. Light sensitivity is present in many
cases, and exposure to the sun may provoke formation of bullae.
Areas of involvement, however, are not strictly photodistributed.
Short stature; small hands and feet; sparse eyebrows, eyelashes,
and pubic and axillary hair and sparse, fine, prematurely gray
scalp hair or alopecia; dystrophic nails; various tooth and skeletal
abnormalities; and hypogonadism are common. One of the more
distinguishing features is an increased incidence of juvenile subcapsular bilateral cataracts. Most patients have normal mental development. Keratoses and later squamous cell carcinomas may develop
on exposed skin. The most worrisome association is osteosarcoma,
which occurs in 30% of those patients with Rothmund-­Thomson
syndrome and RECQL4 pathogenic genetic variants. Genetic testing aids in diagnosis. Management of dermatologic findings begins
with sun avoidance and protection behaviors, and telangiectatic
lesions have been shown to respond to pulsed dye laser therapy. In
the absence of malignancy, life expectancy is normal.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4098 Part XXIX u The Skin

Chapter 698

Diseases of the Epidermis
698.1 Psoriasis
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu
Psoriasis affects 2–4% of the U.S. population, and pediatric psoriasis
accounts for approximately one third of all cases.
Fig. 697.9 Poikiloderma on the arm of an infant with Rothmund-­
Thomson syndrome.

BLOOM SYNDROME

Bloom syndrome is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner,
most commonly in the Ashkenazi Jewish population. It is caused by
pathogenic genetic variants in the BLM/RECQL3 gene encoding a
DNA helicase. Patients are sensitive to UV radiation, with increased
rates of chromosomal breaks and sister chromatid exchanges. Erythema and telangiectasia develop during infancy in a butterfly
distribution on the face after exposure to sunlight. A bullous eruption on the lips and telangiectatic erythema on the cheeks, hands,
and forearms may develop. Café-­au-­lait spots and hypopigmented
macules may be present. Intrauterine growth deficiency developing into short stature, referred to as “proportionate dwarfism,” and
a distinctive facies consisting of a prominent nose and ears and a
small, narrow face are generally found. Intellect is average to low
average. Immunodeficiency is seen in all patients, manifesting as
recurrent ear and pulmonary infections. Gastrointestinal malabsorption, gastroesophageal reflux, and hypogonadism are common.
Affected children have an unusual tendency to develop both solid
tumors (especially of the skin) and lymphoreticular malignancies,
which often result in death during childhood or early adulthood.
Sister chromatid exchange analysis is generally performed to confirm diagnosis. The only effective measures to reduce skin disease
are sun protection and avoidance.

HARTNUP DISEASE

See Chapter 105.5.
Hartnup disease is a rare inborn error of metabolism with autosomal recessive inheritance. Neutral amino acids, including tryptophan, are not transported across the brush border epithelium
of the intestine and kidneys due to a pathogenic variant in the
SLC6A19 gene encoding the transporter. This results in deficiency
of nicotinamide synthesis and causes a photo-­induced pellagra-­like
syndrome. The urine contains increased amounts of monoamine
monocarboxylic amino acids, distinguishing Hartnup disease
from dietary pellagra. Cutaneous signs, which precede neurologic
manifestations, initially develop during the early months of life.
An eczematous, occasionally vesiculobullous, eruption occurs on
the face and extremities in a glove-­and-­stocking photodistribution.
Hyperpigmentation and hyperkeratosis may supervene and are
intensified by further exposure to sunlight. Episodic flares may be
precipitated by febrile illness, sun exposure, emotional stress, and
poor nutrition. In most cases, mental development is normal, but
some patients display emotional instability and episodic cerebellar
ataxia. Neurologic symptoms are fully reversible. Administration of
nicotinamide and protection from sunlight result in improvement
of both cutaneous and neurologic manifestations.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

ETIOLOGY/PATHOGENESIS

Psoriasis is an inflammatory autoimmune-­related disease characterized
by inflammation and keratinocyte proliferation (Fig. 698.1). Within the
dermis, dendritic cells are activated by self-­antigens and release cytokines
such as interferon-­γ, tumor necrosis factor, and interleukin (IL)-­12, IL-­
17, IL-­22, and IL-­23, which recruit T cells. Once activated, the T cells
release cytokines that induce proliferation and abnormal differentiation
of epidermal keratinocytes; in turn, more cytokines are produced to perpetuate the cycle. Psoriasis has a complex multifactorial genetic basis.
Family history of psoriasis is present in ∼50% of patients, typically a
first-­degree relative. The major psoriasis-­susceptibility gene (PSORS1) is
human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-­CW*0602, encoding a class I major histocompatibility complex protein involved in recognition of self-­antigens.
Numerous other psoriasis susceptibility genes have been identified.
Factors contributing to disease onset/flares in some patients include
bacterial and viral infections, trauma, physical or emotional stress,
tobacco use/secondhand exposure, and certain medications.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

This common chronic skin disorder is first evident within the first 2
decades of life for approximately 30% of affected individuals. Plaque
psoriasis, the most common (>80%) subtype, is characterized by
erythematous papules that coalesce to form plaques with sharply
demarcated, irregular borders (Fig. 698.2A-­D). If they are unaltered
by treatment, a thick silvery or yellow-­white scale (resembling mica)
develops (see Fig. 698.2A). Removal of the scale may result in pinpoint bleeding (Auspitz sign). The Koebner phenomenon, in which
new lesions appear at sites of trauma, is a valuable diagnostic feature.
Lesions may occur anywhere, but preferred sites are the scalp, knees,
elbows, umbilicus, superior intergluteal fold, genitalia, and ear canal.
Nail involvement, a valuable diagnostic sign, is characterized by pitting of the nail plate, detachment of the plate (onycholysis), yellowish-­
brown subungual discoloration, and accumulation of subungual debris
(see Fig. 698.2G, H, and M). Plaques are generally asymptomatic; however, pruritus is more common in children than in adults.
Guttate psoriasis, a variant that occurs predominantly in children,
is characterized by an acute eruption of many oval or round papules
smaller than 1.5 cm that are morphologically identical to the larger
plaques of psoriasis (see Fig. 698.2N-­Q). Sites of predilection are the
trunk, face, and proximal portions of the limbs. The onset usually follows a few weeks after a streptococcal infection such as pharyngitis;
thus throat culture and serologic titers should be obtained. Guttate
psoriasis has also been observed after perianal streptococcal infection,
viral infections, sunburn, and withdrawal of systemic corticosteroid
therapy or tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-­α inhibitors. Clinical course
ranges from spontaneous resolution to chronic disease.
Pustular psoriasis is a multisystem autoinflammatory disease characterized by recurrent episodes with the sudden onset of fever, malaise,
extracutaneous organ involvement, and a diffuse erythematous-­pustular
exanthema. It may be associated with plaque psoriasis in some patients;
unregulated cytokine production as a result of pathogenic genetic variants in the IL36RN, AP1S3, and CARD14 genes are implicated in a subset of patients.
Psoriasis is rare in infants but may be severe and recalcitrant and
may pose a diagnostic problem. Psoriatic diaper rash is a common

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 698 u Diseases of the Epidermis 4099
Immunologic mechanisms underlying the persistence of psoriatic lesions

IL-23 and IL-17 signaling
Keratinocyte

Munro’s microabscesses
and NETosis

Parakeratosis
NF-κB

AP1

Post-transcriptional
mRNA stabilization

C/EBPs

MAPK
TRAF2 and TRAF5

Hyperkeratosis

CCL20
CXCL1
CXCL8

IKK

TAK1

TRAF6

Act1

IL-17RE

IL-17RC

IL-17RB

IL-17RA

IL-17RA

IL-17RA

IL-23
p19

AMPs
p40

IL-17E

IL-17C

IL-17A/A
IL-17A/F
IL-17F/F

IL-24
IL-19

AVPs

IL-12Rβ1
IL-22
RORγt

TYK2

IL-23Rα

STAT3
JAK2

IL-17

TNF-α
IL-17

T17/1 cell

IL-23Rα

IL-26

Th17

A

CCL20
CXCL1
CXCL8

T17 cell
IL-17

Acanthosis

IL-22
RORC

IL-36
IL-17C

IL-22
IL-29

IL-20
Remaining alterations in resolved psoriatic lesions

IFN-γ
IL-23

IL-22

IL-23

TNF-α
Tc17
Macrophages
and dendritic cells

Th22

T22 cell

Extended
capillary net

epidermal
B Strengthened
immune defense

Endothelial activation and
recruitment of immune cells

Th17

Hyperproliferation and altered
terminal differentiation of
keratinocytes

C
Fig. 698.1 Immune pathogenesis of psoriasis. The IL-­23 and IL-­17 pathway in psoriasis with elements of their signaling. A, IL-­23 acts on Th17 cells

via the transmembrane receptor complex composed of IL-­12Rβ1 and IL-­23Rα and intracellular JAK–STAT signaling and induces the expression of
IL-­17A, IL-­17F, and IL-­22, which act on epithelial cells through distinct receptor and signaling pathways. B, In psoriatic skin IL-­23 is essential for the
stabilization of the phenotype of IL-­17–producing lymphocytes, activates these cells, and enhances their cytokine production and pathogenicity.
IL-­17 mostly acts synergistically with other cytokines, leading to massive activation of immunologic pathways and cytokines such as IL-­22, IL-­20, and
IL-­24, promoting the epidermal changes. C, After successful antipsoriatic treatment, potentially pathogenetic T cells remain in the resolved psoriatic skin. Blood capillaries extend during psoriatic inflammation by angiogenic signals and recede slowly. AMP, antimicrobial protein; AVP, antiviral
protein; C/EBP, CCAAT-­enhancer-­binding protein; T17, Th17 and Tc17; T1, Th1 and Tc1; T22, Th22 and Tc22; Th, T helper cell; Tc, cytotoxic T cell;
NETosis, activation and release of neutrophil extracellular traps. (From Ghoreschi K, Balato A, Enerbäck C, Sabat R. Therapeutics targeting the IL-­23
and IL-­17 pathway in psoriasis. Lancet. 2021;397:754–766, Fig. 2.)

presentation in children younger than 2 years old. Other rare forms
include psoriatic erythroderma (>90% body surface area involvement),
linear psoriasis, palmoplantar psoriasis, and inverse psoriasis (occurring in intertriginous areas). Children may also develop juvenile psoriatic arthritis, with or without skin lesions.
Psoriasis may be triggered by mild trauma (piercing, tattoos), sun or
chemical burns, medications (β blockers, NSAIDs), or HIV infection.
Comorbid conditions include arthritis, Crohn disease, depression, and
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Psoriasis is a clinical diagnosis. The differential diagnosis of plaque-­
type psoriasis includes nummular dermatitis, tinea corporis, seborrheic dermatitis, postinfectious arthritis syndromes, and pityriasis
rubra pilaris. Scalp lesions may be confused with seborrheic dermatitis,

atopic dermatitis, or tinea capitis. Diaper area psoriasis may mimic seborrheic dermatitis, eczematous diaper dermatitis, perianal streptococcal disease, candidiasis, or allergic contact dermatitis. Guttate psoriasis
can be confused with viral exanthems, secondary syphilis, pityriasis
rosea, and pityriasis lichenoides chronica (PLC). Nail psoriasis must
be differentiated from onychomycosis, lichen planus, and other causes
of onychodystrophy.

PATHOLOGY

When the diagnosis is in doubt, histopathologic examination of an
untreated lesion can be helpful. Characteristic changes of psoriasis
include parakeratosis, acanthosis, elongated rete ridges, neutrophilic infiltrate in the epidermis sometimes forming microabscesses,
dilated dermal blood vessels, and lymphocytic infiltrate in the
dermis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4100 Part XXIX u The Skin

A

B

G

H

M

N

D

C

I

K

J

O

F

E

P

L

Q

Fig. 698.2 Clinical manifestations of psoriasis. Typical erythematous plaques with silvery scales (A) can be scattered (B, psoriasis nummularis),

cover larger areas of the skin (C, psoriasis geographica), or affect the entire body surface (D, erythrodermic psoriasis). Scalp involvement might be accompanied by nonscarring alopecia (E). Psoriatic arthritis affects up to 30% of all patients (F, thumb interphalangeal joint). Nail changes are frequent
and range from pitting and yellow or brown discoloration (G) to complete dystrophy (H). Psoriasis inversa occurs in intertriginous areas and is usually
devoid of scales (I). Pustular psoriasis might occur in a generalized form (J and K) or localized (L, palmoplantar type and M, acrodermatitis continua
suppurativa type). In children, the onset as guttate psoriasis might follow streptococcal infection of the upper respiratory tract (N) and affect any site
of the body (O-­Q). (From Boehncke WH, Schön MP. Psoriasis. Lancet. 2015;386:983–992, Fig. 1, p. 984.)

TREATMENT

The therapeutic approach varies with the age of the child, type of psoriasis, sites of involvement, and extent of the disease. Physical and
chemical trauma to the skin should be avoided as much as possible to
prevent Koebner-­response lesions. The treatment of psoriasis should
be viewed as a four-­tier process. Efficacy varies with each therapy
(Table 698.1).
The first tier is topical therapy. The first-­line topical agents for
lesions on the body are emollients, vitamin D analogs (calcipotriene
or calcitriol, although calcitriol is less irritating for children), and
mid-­to high-­potency corticosteroids (see Chapter 687). A proprietary formulation containing both calcipotriene and betamethasone
dipropionate (a high-­potency topical corticosteroid) exists in ointment
and solution forms. The preparation that is least potent but effective
should be applied twice a day. Second-­line topical options for lesions
on the body include retinoids (tazarotene), tar preparations, anthralin,
and keratolytics (salicylic acid or urea). Facial or intertriginous lesions
may be treated with low-­potency topical corticosteroids and/or topical
vitamin D analogs or calcineurin inhibitors as corticosteroid-­sparing
agents. For scalp lesions, applications of a phenol and saline solution
(e.g., Baker Cummins P&S liquid) or salicylic acid shampoo followed
by a tar shampoo are effective in the removal of scales. A high-­potency
to superpotency corticosteroid in a foam, solution, or lotion base may
be applied when the scaling is diminished. Nail lesions are difficult to
treat topically; the first-­line approach is a high-­potency topical corticosteroid to the proximal nail fold.

The second tier of therapy is phototherapy. Narrow-­band ultraviolet B (311 nm; NB-­UVB) is an effective and well-­tolerated alternative in
pediatric patients with plaque and guttate psoriasis poorly controlled
with topical treatments. Excimer (308 nm) laser UVB irradiation may
be used for localized treatment-­resistant plaques. Exposure to natural
sunlight is often effective for less severe psoriasis.
The third tier is systemic therapy for children with moderate to
severe, recalcitrant or generalized psoriasis. Methotrexate (0.2-­0.7 mg/
kg/wk to a maximum of 25 mg/week) is the first-­line systemic agent
for children; other options include oral retinoids (0.5-­1.0 mg/kg/day
to a maximum of 50 mg/day) and cyclosporine (modified formulation, 3-­5 mg/kg/day). Oral retinoids may be cautiously combined with
phototherapy, although doses may need to be decreased because of the
photosensitizing effects of the medication. Oral retinoids are also considered for generalized pustular and diffuse guttate psoriasis.
Biologic response modifiers are increasingly used in place of traditional oral agents. TNF-­α inhibitors such as etanercept, infliximab,
and adalimumab have increasingly been used for pediatric psoriasis.
Etanercept has FDA approval for those 4 years and older with psoriasis. One study reported a significant improvement in psoriatic lesions
at 12 weeks with 57% versus 11% of patients receiving etanercept or
placebo, respectively, achieving a 75% improvement in Psoriasis Area
and Severity Index-­75 (PASI-­75, a metric to evaluate psoriasis severity). Ustekinumab, a human monoclonal antibody that blocks IL-­12
and IL-­23 and their cell-­surface receptors, is approved for those 6 years
and older with moderate to severe psoriasis. Biologic IL-­17 inhibitors

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 698 u Diseases of the Epidermis 4101
Table 698.1  Recommendations for Pediatric Psoriasis
STRENGTH OF
RECOMMENDATION

LEVEL OF
EVIDENCE

Topical corticosteroids are recommended for the treatment of pediatric psoriasis as an off-­label
therapy

B

II

The use of ultra-­high-­potency topical corticosteroids as monotherapy is effective for short-­term
treatment of localized psoriasis in pediatric patients

C

II

Tacrolimus 0.1% ointment is recommended for off-­label use as monotherapy for pediatric psoriasis of
the face and genital region

C

II-­III

Calcipotriene/calcipotriol is recommended as a treatment option for childhood plaque psoriasis

B

II

Because of the theoretical risk of increased calcium absorption and systemic effects of hypercalcemia,
occlusion of calcipotriene/calcipotriol applied to large body surface areas is not recommended

B

III

Monitoring of vitamin D metabolites may be considered during calcipotriene/calcipotriol therapy
when applied to a large body surface area

B

I-­II

The combination of calcipotriol/betamethasone dipropionate ointment applied once daily for up
to 4 weeks at a time is recommended as a safe and effective treatment for children ages 12 yr and
older with mild to moderate plaque psoriasis

B

I-­II

The combination of calcipotriol/betamethasone dipropionate suspension applied once daily for up
to 8 wk at a time is recommended as a safe and effective treatment for children ages 12 yr and
older with mild to moderate plaque psoriasis of the scalp

B

II

The use of emollients (at the same time or different time of day) with topical calcipotriene may be
considered to reduce irritation and enhance the efficacy of calcipotriene

C

III

Rotational therapy with topical vitamin D analogues, topical calcineurin inhibitors, emollients,
tar-­based therapies, and topical corticosteroids may be considered in children as steroid-­sparing
regimens that may reduce potential adverse effects from overreliance on topical steroid therapy

C

II

The off-­label use of topical tazarotene may be recommended as monotherapy or in combination
with topical corticosteroids for the treatment of localized pediatric skin or nail psoriasis

C

III

Long-­term use (12 wk or longer) of topical anthralin is recommended for the treatment of mild to
moderate psoriasis. Short-­contact anthralin protocols are recommended to limit adverse effects

B

II

Coal tar preparations can be used as a monotherapy or combined with other topical therapies for
the treatment of pediatric psoriasis

C

II-­III

The use of coal tar preparations in conjunction with phototherapy is effective for the treatment of
psoriasis in children but may be limited by the theoretical long-­term risk of carcinogenesis

B

II-­III

NB-­UVB is recommended as a treatment option for moderate to severe pediatric plaque and guttate
psoriasis

B

II-­III

The use of excimer laser or PUVA therapy in children with psoriasis may be efficacious and well
tolerated but has limited supporting evidence

C

III

Methotrexate is recommended as an effective systemic therapy for moderate to severe plaque
psoriasis and other psoriasis subtypes in children

B

II-­III

Methotrexate is recommended as an effective systemic therapy for pustular psoriasis in children

B

III

Methotrexate weight-­based dosing is recommended in younger children, ranging from 0.2 to 0.7
mg/kg/wk (maximum, 25 mg/wk)

B

III

Folic acid supplementation daily or six times weekly during treatment with methotrexate is
recommended

B

II

Routine clinical and laboratory monitoring is recommended before and during treatment with
methotrexate

B

III

Cyclosporine is recommended as an effective systemic therapy for moderate to severe plaque
psoriasis in children

B

II-­III

Cyclosporine is recommended as an effective systemic therapy for moderate to severe pustular
psoriasis in children

B

III

Cyclosporine is recommended for short-­term crisis management of severe or unstable plaque,
erythrodermic, or pustular psoriasis until the patient can be transitioned to a medication
appropriate for long-­term use

C

III

Routine blood pressure clinical and laboratory monitoring is recommended during therapy with
cyclosporine

A

III

Modified cyclosporine (for microemulsion in capsules or solution) is recommended for use and is not
interchangeable with unmodified forms of cyclosporine

C

III

RECOMMENDATION

Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4102 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 698.1  Recommendations for Pediatric Psoriasis—cont’d
STRENGTH OF
RECOMMENDATION

LEVEL OF
EVIDENCE

Acitretin is recommended as an effective, nonimmunosuppressive systemic therapy for children with
extensive guttate or moderate to severe (ideally thin plaque) psoriasis vulgaris at a dosage of 0.1-­1
mg/kg/d

B

II

Acitretin is recommended as an effective systemic therapy for pustular psoriasis in children

B

II-­III

Acitretin combined with NB-­UVB therapy may be synergistic for plaque and pustular psoriasis in
childhood and allows for a reduction in dosing of both agents

C

III

Acitretin may be combined with other systemic therapies such as methotrexate or cyclosporine, or
biologics, depending on the individual clinical situation

C

III

Routine clinical and laboratory monitoring is recommended during therapy with acitretin

C

III

Fumaric acid esters may be considered as a potentially effective alternative therapy for pediatric
patients with moderate to severe psoriasis who are candidates for systemic therapy

C

II-­III

Clinical and laboratory monitoring is recommended during treatment with fumaric acid esters

C

III

Etanercept is recommended as an effective therapy for moderate to severe psoriasis in children 6 yr
of age and older

A

I-­III

Etanercept dosing is typically once weekly and is dosed subcutaneously at 0.8 mg/kg with a
maximum of 50 mg weekly

A

I, III

Adalimumab is recommended for off-­label use as an effective therapy in children and adolescents
with moderate to severe psoriasis

B

I, III

The dose of adalimumab is 0.8 mg/kg (maximum, 40 mg) at weeks 0 and 1 and then is given every
other week; adalimumab administered at a dose of 0.8 mg/kg is more efficacious than at a dose of
0.4 mg/kg

B

I

Infliximab can be recommended as monotherapy or in combination with methotrexate for use in
pediatric patients with severe plaque or pustular psoriasis that is unresponsive to other systemic
medications, rapidly progressive, unstable, and/or life threatening

C

III

The starting dose of infliximab is an infusion of 5 mg/kg administered on weeks 0, 2, and 6 and then
every 8 weeks

C

III

Ustekinumab is recommended as an effective therapy for adolescents 12 yr and older with moderate
to severe plaque psoriasis

A

I, III

Ustekinumab can be used as an effective therapy for pediatric patients younger than 12 yr old with
moderate to severe plaque psoriasis

C

III

Ustekinumab is given at weeks 0, 4, and 16 and then every 12 weeks with weight-­based dosing as
follows: 0.75 mg/kg if < 60 kg, 45 mg if 60 to 100 kg, and 90 mg if > 100 kg

B

I

Biologics may be safely combined with topical corticosteroids, with or without a vitamin D analogue,
to augment effectiveness for the treatment of moderate to severe plaque psoriasis

C

III

The major risk for biologics in children is injection site reaction, but patients should be monitored for
their increased risk of infection

B

II

RECOMMENDATION

Data from Menter A, Cordoro KM, Davis DMR, et al. Joint American Academy of Dermatology–National Psoriasis Foundation guidelines of care for the management and treatment
of psoriasis in pediatric patients. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2020;82(1):161–201, Tables XX–XLVIII, pp. 173–189.

secukinumab and ixekizumab are also FDA approved for those 6 and
older. The safety and efficacy data of these biologic agents show they
are generally well tolerated and efficacious in the treatment of moderate to severe plaque psoriasis. The primary risk is injection site reaction. A small-­molecule inhibitor of phosphodiesterase 4, apremilast, is
also used for pediatric psoriasis. IL-­23 inhibitors may also have a role
in the treatment of severe disease and are being studied in pediatric
populations.

PROGNOSIS

Prognosis is best for children with limited disease. Psoriasis is a lifelong disease characterized by remissions and exacerbations. Arthritis
or various eye diseases may be extracutaneous complications. Metabolic and cardiovascular disorders also occur with increased frequency
in patients with psoriasis. For example, an increasing degree of obesity
and the associated metabolic syndrome (hyperglycemia, hyperlipidemia, and hypertension) correlates with psoriasis severity. Patients with
psoriasis also have increased rates of stroke, myocardial infarction,

and other vascular diseases later in adult life. A proposed mechanism
involves the systemic proinflammatory state induced by both psoriasis and these associated conditions, although the direction of causality
remains unclear. Furthermore, children suffering from psoriasis have a
greater risk of taking psychotropic medications for anxiety or depression and are more likely to report impairment in quality of life due to
their chronic disease.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

698.2 Pityriasis Lichenoides
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu
Pityriasis lichenoides encompasses a disease spectrum ranging from PLC to pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta
(PLEVA; Mucha-­Habermann disease). The designation of pityriasis

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 698 u Diseases of the Epidermis 4103

Fig. 698.3 Widespread plaques with fine scale in pityriasis lichenoides
chronica.

Fig. 698.4 Necrotic lesion with erythematous halo in pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta.

lichenoides as acute or chronic refers to the morphologic appearance of the lesions rather than to the duration of the disease. No
correlation is found between the type of lesion at the onset of the
eruption and the duration of the disease. Many patients have both
acute and chronic lesions simultaneously, and transition of lesions
from one form into another occurs occasionally. As a result, some
authors advocate using pityriasis lichenoides as the general diagnosis rather than differentiating between PLC and PLEVA. Febrile
ulceronecrotic Mucha-­Habermann disease (FUMHD) is a rare subtype of PLEVA that is more severe and potentially life-­threatening.

ETIOLOGY/PATHOGENESIS

Two main theories exist for the etiology of pityriasis lichenoides. The
first is that it arises in a genetically susceptible individual as a hypersensitivity reaction to an infection. The second is that it represents a
monoclonal T-­cell lymphocytic proliferation on the pathway to cutaneous T-­cell dyscrasia.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Pityriasis lichenoides most commonly manifests in the second and
third decades of life; 30% of cases manifest before age 20 years, with
peaks of incidence at 5 and 10 years of age. The overall eruption
persists for months to years with a tendency to eventually remit.
PLC manifests gradually as generalized, multiple, brown-­red papules
to plaques that are covered by a fine grayish scale (Fig. 698.3). Lesions
may be asymptomatic or may cause minimal pruritus and occasionally
become vesicular, hemorrhagic, crusted, or superinfected. Individual
papules become flat and brownish in 2-­6 weeks, ultimately leaving
hyperpigmented or hypopigmented macules and patches. Scarring is
unusual. Various stages of lesions are present, most commonly on the
trunk and extremities and generally spare the face, palmoplantar surfaces, scalp, and mucous membranes.
PLEVA manifests as an abrupt eruption of numerous 2-­to 3-­mm
papules that have a vesiculopustular and then a purpuric center, are
covered by a dark adherent hemorrhagic or necrotic crust, and are
surrounded by an erythematous halo (Fig. 698.4). Constitutional
symptoms, such as fever, malaise, headache, and arthralgias, may be
present for 2-­3 days after the initial outbreak. Lesions are distributed diffusely on the trunk and extremities, as in PLC. Individual
lesions heal within a few weeks, sometimes leaving a varioliform
scar, and successive crops of papules produce the characteristic
polymorphous appearance of the eruption, with lesions in various
stages of evolution.
FUMHD manifests as high fever and ulceronecrotic nodules up
to a few centimeters in diameter, which are most common on the
anterior trunk and flexor surfaces of the proximal upper extremities.
Histopathology of lesions is consistent with PLEVA. Hemorrhagic bullae, mucosal ulcers, arthritis, cardiomyopathy, vasculitis, abdominal

complaints, hematologic abnormalities (megaloblastic anemia, pancytopenia, and diffuse intravascular coagulation), and superinfection
of cutaneous lesions with Staphylococcus aureus may also develop.
These patients may have a history of previous PLEVA diagnosis.
Although there is no reported standardized treatment and there have
been reports of fatalities, typically the ulceronecrotic lesions heal with
hypopigmented scarring in a few weeks.

PATHOLOGY

PLC histologically shows a parakeratotic, thickened corneal layer;
epidermal spongiosis; a superficial perivascular infiltrate of macrophages and predominantly CD8 lymphocytes that may extend into
the epidermis; and small numbers of extravasated erythrocytes in the
papillary dermis.
The histopathologic changes of PLEVA and FUMHD reflect their
more severe nature. Intercellular and intracellular edema in the epidermis may lead to degeneration of keratinocytes. A dense perivascular
mononuclear cell infiltrate, endothelial cell swelling, and extravasation
of erythrocytes into the epidermis and dermis are additional characteristic features.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis of pityriasis lichenoides includes guttate
psoriasis, pityriasis rosea, drug eruptions, secondary syphilis, viral
exanthems, lymphomatoid papulosis, and lichen planus. The chronicity of pityriasis lichenoides helps preclude pityriasis rosea, viral
exanthems, and some drug eruptions. A skin biopsy can help distinguish pityriasis lichenoides from other entities in the differential
diagnosis.

TREATMENT

Pityriasis lichenoides should be considered a benign condition
that does not alter the health of the child. A lubricant to remove
excessive scaling may be all that is necessary if the patient is asymptomatic. If treatment is required, first-­line agents are oral antiinflammatory antibiotics such as erythromycin (30-­50 mg/kg/day
to a maximum of 4000 mg/day for 2-­3 months) or doxycycline for
children >8 years. Topical corticosteroids (mid-­potency, applied
twice daily) and topical calcineurin inhibitors may help the pruritus
and inflammation but do not alter the course of the disease. Phototherapy (NB-­UVB) is the second-­line treatment option. Methotrexate should be reserved for severely symptomatic cases. The rare
FUMHD usually requires inpatient treatment; initially, systemic
corticosteroids, methotrexate, intravenous immunoglobulin, or
cyclosporine may be necessary, with eventual transition to another
form of treatment, as mentioned earlier, once the disease improves
and stabilizes.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4104 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 698.5 Keratotic follicular plugs with surrounding erythema in
keratosis pilaris.

Fig. 698.6 Herald patch and surrounding pityriasis rosea.

ETIOLOGY/PATHOGENESIS

698.3 Keratosis Pilaris
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu
Keratosis pilaris is a common papular eruption resulting from keratin
plugging of hair follicles. It displays an autosomal dominant transmission with variable penetrance. Typical areas of involvement include the
upper extensor surfaces of the arms and thighs, cheeks, and buttocks. The
lesions may resemble gooseflesh; they are noninflammatory, scaly, follicular papules that do not coalesce. They are generally asymptomatic but
may be pruritic. Irritation of the follicular plugs occasionally causes erythema surrounding the keratotic papules (Fig. 698.5). A subset of patients
has keratosis pilaris associated with facial telangiectasia and ulerythema
ophryogenes, a rare cutaneous disorder characterized by inflammatory
keratotic facial papules that may result in scars, atrophy, and alopecia.
Because the lesions of keratosis pilaris are associated with and accentuated by dry skin, they are often more prominent during the winter.
Keratosis pilaris is more frequent in patients with atopic dermatitis and
is most common during childhood and early adulthood, tending to subside in the third decade of life. Treatment of keratosis pilaris is optional.
Measures to decrease pruritus include moisturization with a bland emollient. Regular applications of a 10–40% urea cream or an alpha-­hydroxy
acid preparation such as 12% lactic acid cream or lotion can improve the
appearance of keratosis pilaris but may further contribute to pruritus and
irritation. Therapy may improve the condition but does not cure it.

698.4 Lichen Spinulosus
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu
Lichen spinulosus is an uncommon disorder that occurs principally
in children and more frequently in boys. The cause is unknown. The
lesions consist of sharply circumscribed irregular plaques of spiny, keratotic, follicular plugs. Plaques may occur anywhere on the body and
are often distributed symmetrically on the trunk, elbows, knees, and
extensor surfaces of the limbs. Although sometimes erythematous or
pruritic, the lesions are usually skin colored and asymptomatic.
Treatment is usually unnecessary. For patients who regard the eruption as a cosmetic defect, urea-­containing lubricants (10–40%) are
often effective in flattening the projections. The plaques usually disappear spontaneously after several months or years.

698.5 Pityriasis Rosea
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu
Pityriasis rosea is a common benign papulosquamous disorder typically affecting adolescents and young adults 15-­30 years of age. The disease is more commonly seen in the winter and is usually self-­limited.

The cause of pityriasis rosea is unknown; a viral agent is suspected, with a
current focus on human herpesviruses 6 and 7. Supporting evidence for an
infectious etiology includes the tendency for it to occur in (familial) case
clusters, presence of a prodrome and seasonal variation, and infrequent
recurrences, although the rash itself does not appear to be contagious.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

This benign, common eruption occurs most frequently in children and
young adults. Although a prodrome of fever, malaise, arthralgia, and
pharyngitis may precede the eruption, children rarely complain of such
symptoms. A herald patch classically precedes the generalized eruption and may occur anywhere on the body. Herald patches are generally
larger than other lesions and vary from 1 to 10 cm in diameter; they are
annular in configuration and have a raised border with fine, adherent
scales. Approximately 5-­10 days after the appearance of the herald patch,
a widespread, symmetric eruption involving mainly the trunk and proximal limbs becomes evident (Fig. 698.6). In the inverse form of pityriasis
rosea, the face, scalp, and distal limbs may be preferentially involved.
Lesions may appear in crops for several days. Typical lesions are oval
or round, <1 cm in diameter, slightly raised, and pink to brown. The
developed lesion is covered by a fine scale, which gives the skin a crinkly
appearance. Some lesions clear centrally and produce a collarette of scale
that is attached only at the periphery. Papular, vesicular, urticarial, hemorrhagic, large annular, and mucosal lesions are unusual variants. The
long axis of each lesion is usually aligned with the cutaneous cleavage
lines, a feature that creates the so-­called Christmas tree pattern on the
back. Conformation to skin lines is often more discernible in the anterior
and posterior axillary folds and supraclavicular areas. The lesions most
commonly are asymptomatic but may be mildly to severely pruritic.
Duration of the eruption varies from 2 to 12 weeks, with self-­resolution.
After the eruption has resolved, postinflammatory hypopigmentation or
hyperpigmentation may be pronounced, particularly in dark-­skinned
patients. These changes disappear in subsequent weeks to months.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The herald patch may be mistaken for tinea corporis, a pitfall that can
be avoided if microscopic evaluation of a potassium hydroxide preparation of scrapings of the lesion is performed. The generalized eruption
resembles a number of other diseases; secondary syphilis is the most
important. Drug eruptions, viral exanthems, guttate psoriasis, PLC,
and nummular dermatitis can also be confused with pityriasis rosea.

TREATMENT

Therapy is unnecessary for asymptomatic patients with pityriasis rosea. If
scaling is prominent, a bland emollient may suffice. Pruritus may be suppressed by a lubricating lotion containing menthol and camphor or by an
oral antihistamine for sedation, particularly at night, when itching may be
troublesome. Occasionally, a mid-­potency topical corticosteroid preparation may be necessary to alleviate pruritus. Exposure to natural sunlight
and NB-­UVB phototherapy may reduce disease duration and severity. Acyclovir has been used in some cases to treat symptoms and shorten duration.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 698 u Diseases of the Epidermis 4105

698.6 Pityriasis Rubra Pilaris
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu

of dermatomyositis may present with a pityriasis rubra pilaris–like
eruption.

HISTOLOGY
ETIOLOGY/PATHOGENESIS

The cause of pityriasis rubra pilaris remains unclear. Pityriasis rubra
pilaris can be subdivided into six clinical subtypes based on age of
onset, characteristics, and other features. Most cases are sporadic,
but familial forms are commonly seen in the fifth subtype, with
gain-­of-­function variants in the CARD14 gene. The sixth subtype
occurs in those with HIV infection. Some studies have indicated a
role for TNF-­α in disease development, whereas other hypotheses
for causal factors include abnormal vitamin A metabolism, trauma,
infections, immunosuppression, and UV light exposure.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

This rare inflammatory dermatosis is known for its variability in
clinical presentation and course of disease. It often has an insidious
onset with diffuse scaling and erythema of the scalp, which is indistinguishable from the findings in seborrheic dermatitis, and with
thick hyperkeratosis of the palms and soles (Fig. 698.7A). Lesions
over the elbows and knees are also common (see Fig. 698.7B), and
generalized erythroderma develops in some patients. The characteristic primary lesion is a firm, dome-­shaped, tiny, acuminate,
pink to red papule, which has a central keratotic plug pierced by
a vellus hair. Masses of these papules coalesce to form large, erythematous, sharply demarcated orange-­pink plaques with overlying
scale, within which islands of normal skin can be distinguished.
Typical papules on the dorsum of the proximal phalanges are readily palpated. Gray plaques or papules resembling lichen planus may
be found in the oral cavity. Dystrophic changes in the nails may
occur and mimic those of psoriasis. Lesions are commonly pruritic. In childhood, the prognosis for eventual resolution is relatively good.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Differential diagnosis includes ichthyosis, seborrheic dermatitis, keratoderma of the palms and soles, and psoriasis. The “Wong” variant

Skin biopsy revealing follicular plugging, epidermal acanthosis, perivascular infiltrate, checkerboard pattern of orthokeratosis and parakeratosis, and an intact granular layer may differentiate this condition
from psoriasis and seborrheic dermatitis.

TREATMENT

The numerous therapeutic regimens recommended are difficult
to evaluate because pityriasis rubra pilaris has a capricious course
with exacerbations and remissions. Moisturization alone is useful
in mild cases. Topical agents, such as mid-­to high-­potency corticosteroids, keratolytics (urea, salicylic acid), vitamin D analogs
(calcipotriene), retinoids (tazarotene, tretinoin), and tar, are used
in combination with systemic agents for widespread disease and
as monotherapy for localized disease. When further treatment is
necessary, oral retinoids (isotretinoin or acitretin 0.5-­1 mg/kg/day;
maximum daily dose of isotretinoin is 80 mg/day and acitretin is
50 mg/day) are used as first-­line agents, whereas methotrexate is
used as a second-­line agent. Third-­line treatment options include
biologic TNF-­α inhibitors, cyclosporine, azathioprine, and NB-­
UVB phototherapy. Ustekinumab and secukinumab have also been
described as efficacious.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

698.7 Darier Disease (Keratosis Follicularis)
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu

ETIOLOGY/PATHOGENESIS

A rare genetic disorder, Darier disease is inherited as an autosomal
dominant trait and is caused by pathogenic genetic variants in the
ATP2A2 gene. This gene encodes a cellular calcium pump, SERCA2,
and dysfunction results in loss of adhesion between epidermal cells and
abnormal keratinization.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Onset usually occurs in late childhood and persists throughout life.
Typical lesions are small, firm, skin-­colored, warty papules that are not
always follicular in location. The lesions eventually acquire yellow, malodorous, greasy crusts and coalesce to form large, gray-­brown, vegetative plaques (Fig. 698.8). The scalp, face, neck, shoulders, chest, back,
axillae, limb flexures, and groin are symmetrically involved. Papules,
fissures, crusts, and ulcers may appear on the mucous membranes of
the lips, tongue, buccal mucosa, pharynx, larynx, and vulva. Hyperkeratosis of the palms and soles and nail dystrophy with subungual
hyperkeratosis and longitudinal red and white banding are variable
features. Severe pruritus, secondary infection, offensive odor, and pain
may occur. Several exacerbating triggers have been identified: sweating, UV light exposure, heat, friction, surgery, and infections; thus
Darier disease has a chronic relapsing course that usually worsens in
summertime.

A

HISTOLOGY

Histologic changes seen in Darier disease are diagnostic. Hyperkeratosis with keratin plugging, intraepidermal separation (acantholysis)
with formation of suprabasal clefts, and dyskeratotic epidermal cells
are characteristic features.

B

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Fig. 698.7 Pityriasis rubra pilaris. A, Orange palmar hyperkeratosis.
B, Elbow lesions.

Darier disease is most likely to be confused with seborrheic dermatitis,
acanthosis nigricans, flat warts, or Hailey-­Hailey disease.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4106 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 698.8 Papules coalescing into a large plaque on the back of a
patient with Darier disease.

TREATMENT

Treatment is nonspecific and begins with emollients and avoidance
of triggers. First-­line treatment for mild/localized disease is low-­to
mid-­potency corticosteroids; second-­line treatment are topical retinoids. Further treatment options include topical keratolytic agents
(urea, lactic acid), antiseptic washes (triclosan, chlorhexidine gluconate, or bleach), or calcineurin inhibitors. More severe/generalized disease is treated with oral isotretinoin or acitretin (0.5-­1.0 mg/
kg/day for 3-­4 months; maximum daily dose of isotretinoin is 80
mg/day and acitretin is 50 mg/day). Secondary infections are common and must be treated appropriately. Novel treatments currently
being investigated include anti–IL-­6 antibodies, cyclooxygenase­2 (COX2) inhibitors and miglustat (a glucosylceramide synthase
inhibitor).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 698.9 Slightly hypopigmented, uniform papules of lichen nitidus.

HISTOLOGY

Although the diagnosis can be made clinically, a biopsy is occasionally
indicated. The lichen nitidus papule consists of sharply circumscribed
nests of lymphocytes and histiocytes in the upper dermis enclosed by
clawlike epidermal rete ridges.

TREATMENT

The course of lichen nitidus spans months to years, but the lesions
eventually involute completely. No treatment is necessary, but mid-­to
high-­potency topical steroids may be used for pruritus.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

698.9 Lichen Striatus
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu

698.8 Lichen Nitidus
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu

ETIOLOGY/PATHOGENESIS

The etiology of lichen nitidus is unknown but has been linked to
immune alteration.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

This uncommon, chronic, benign, papular eruption is characterized
by minute (1-­2 mm), flat-­topped, shiny, firm papules of uniform
size. The papules are most often skin-­colored but may be pink or
red. In darker-­skinned individuals, they are usually hypopigmented
(Fig. 698.9). Sites of predilection are the genitals, abdomen, chest,
forearms, wrists, and inner aspects of the thighs. The lesions may be
sparse or numerous and may form large plaques; careful examination usually discloses linear papules in a line of a scratch (Koebner
phenomenon), a valuable clue to the diagnosis because it occurs in
only a few diseases. Lichen nitidus occurs in all age-­groups but is
most prevalent in school-­age children and young adults. Patients
with lichen nitidus are usually asymptomatic and constitutionally
well, although pruritus may be severe. The lesions may be confused
with those of lichen planus, and lichen nitidus can rarely occur concurrently with lichen planus.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Widespread keratosis pilaris can also be confused with lichen nitidus,
but the follicular localization of the papules and the absence of Koebner phenomenon in the former distinguish them. Verruca plana (flat
warts), if small and uniform in size, may occasionally resemble lichen
nitidus.

ETIOLOGY/PATHOGENESIS

Lichen striatus is hypothesized to be caused by a combination of a
genetic predisposition present in a mosaic manner in the skin (following the lines of Blaschko) and an infectious trigger.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

A benign, self-­limited eruption, lichen striatus consists of a continuous
or discontinuous linear band of papules in a Blaschkoid distribution.
The primary lesion is a flat-­topped, hypopigmented or pink papule covered with fine scale. Aggregates of these papules form multiple bands
or plaques. The papules are gradually replaced by hypopigmented macules, which may be the presenting lesion in some cases. The eruption
evolves over a period of days or weeks in an otherwise healthy child,
remains stationary for weeks to months, and finally remits without
sequelae, usually within 2 years. Symptoms are usually absent, although
some children complain of itching. Nail dystrophy may occur when the
eruption involves the proximal nail fold and matrix (Fig. 698.10).

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Lichen striatus is occasionally confused with other disorders. The initial plaque may resemble papular eczema or lichen nitidus until the
linear configuration becomes apparent. Linear lichen planus and linear psoriasis are usually associated with typical individual lesions elsewhere on the body. Linear epidermal nevi are permanent lesions that
often become more hyperkeratotic and hyperpigmented than those of
lichen striatus.

TREATMENT

Treatment is not necessary and generally not very effective. A low-­
potency topical corticosteroid preparation or topical calcineurin

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 698 u Diseases of the Epidermis 4107

Fig. 698.10 Lichen striatus with nail dystrophy.
inhibitor can be used when pruritus is a problem in a patient with
lichen striatus.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

698.10 Lichen Planus
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu

ETIOLOGY/PATHOGENESIS

The cause of lichen planus is unknown, but an immune attack on the
skin by cytotoxic T cells is postulated. A genetic predisposition may
exist, and other proposed triggers include metal exposure, certain
medications, liver disease, vaccinations (especially hepatitis B vaccination), and infections (especially hepatitis C virus).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

This is a rare disorder in young children and uncommon in older
ones. The classic form of lichen planus is the most common subtype
in children, often exhibiting an acute eruptive onset. The lesions
erupt in an explosive fashion, much like a viral exanthem, and spread
to involve most of the body surface. The primary lesion is a violaceous, sharply demarcated, polygonal papule with fine white lines
(Wickham’s striae) or scale on the surface. Papules may coalesce to
form large plaques (Fig. 676.11). The papules are intensely pruritic,
and additional papules are often induced by scratching (Koebner
phenomenon) so that lines of them are detected. Sites of predilection
are the flexor surfaces of the wrists, the forearms, the inner aspects of
the thighs, and the ankles.
Hypertrophic, linear, bullous, atrophic, annular, follicular, erosive,
ulcerative, and actinic forms of lichen planus may also occur in children. Characteristic lesions of mucous membranes consist of pinhead-­
size white papules that coalesce to form reticulated and lacy patterns on
the buccal mucosa. Erosive ulcers are also common in the oral mucosa
and may also involve the gastrointestinal tract. Nail involvement causes
nail dystrophy. The disorder may persist for months to years, but self-­
resolution eventually occurs in most cases. Intense hyperpigmentation
frequently persists for a long time after the resolution of lesions.

HISTOLOGY

The histopathologic findings in lichen planus are specific, consisting
of hyperkeratosis, irregular acanthosis, wedge-­shaped hypergranulosis,
apoptotic keratinocytes in the lower epidermis and upper dermis, and
basal cell degeneration with a bandlike lymphocytic infiltrate at the
epidermal-­dermal junction. Pigment incontinence is frequently seen.
Biopsy is indicated if the diagnosis is unclear.

Fig. 698.11 Flat-­topped, purple polygonal papules of lichen planus.

TREATMENT

Treatment is directed at alleviation of the intense pruritus and amelioration of the skin lesions. First-­line treatment with a high-­potency
topical corticosteroid applied twice daily is effective for localized disease on the trunk or extremities; lesions on the face and genitals may be
treated with low-­to mid-­potency corticosteroids. Alternatives to topical steroids include topical calcineurin inhibitors or vitamin D analogs.
Thick lesions may require intralesional corticosteroid injection. Oral
antihistamines (hydroxyzine) are often added for the pruritus. Short
courses of systemic glucocorticoids or phototherapy (NB-­UVB) are
used as second-­line approaches for rare cases of widespread, intractable
lesions. Other medications with reported efficacy include oral retinoids
(acitretin), dapsone, metronidazole, griseofulvin, and methotrexate.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

698.11 Porokeratosis
Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu

ETIOLOGY/PATHOGENESIS

Porokeratoses are a group of uncommon dermatoses due to abnormal
epidermal keratinization. Genetic variants in the mevalonate pathway
with autosomal dominant transmission, chronic sun exposure (particularly with the disseminated superficial actinic form), and immunosuppression (particularly organ transplantation) may contribute.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Porokeratosis is a rare, chronic, progressive disease of keratinization. The prototypical lesion is an atrophic papule or plaque with a
surrounding ridge of hyperkeratosis, called cornoid lamella. Several
forms have been delineated: solitary plaques, linear porokeratosis,
hyperkeratotic lesions of the palms and soles, disseminated eruptive
lesions, and superficial actinic porokeratosis. Classic porokeratosis of
Mibelli begins in childhood and is more common in males. Sites of
predilection are the limbs, face, genitals, mucous membranes, palms,
and soles. The primary lesion is a small, keratotic papule that slowly
enlarges peripherally so that the center becomes depressed, with the
edge forming an elevated wall or collar (Fig. 698.12). The configuration
of the plaque may be round, oval, or gyrate. The elevated border is split
by a thin groove from which minute cornified projections protrude.
The central atrophic area is yellow, gray, or tan and sclerotic, smooth,
and dry, whereas the hyperkeratotic border is a darker gray, brown, or
black. Linear porokeratosis is also more common in childhood and
typically follows the lines of Blaschko. The disease is slowly progressive
but relatively asymptomatic; some patients experience pruritus or pain.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4108 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 698.12 Large plaque of porokeratosis of Mibelli with raised border and depressed center.

Fig. 698.13 Numerous flat-­topped, red papules in Gianotti-­Crosti
syndrome.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
HISTOLOGY

A skin biopsy is usually unnecessary but will disclose the characteristic
cornoid lamella (plug of stratum corneum cells with retained nuclei),
which is responsible for the invariable linear ridge of the lesion. The
granular layer is absent beneath the cornoid lamella.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis of porokeratosis includes warts, epidermal
nevi, lichen planus, granuloma annulare, tinea corporis, nummular
eczema, pityriasis rosea, and elastosis perforans serpiginosa.

TREATMENT

No treatment is uniformly successful; thus therapeutic decisions depend
largely on lesion size, location, symptoms, and patient preference.
Most lesions are asymptomatic and do not require any intervention;
however, when treatment is necessary, options include pharmacologic management (topical vitamin D analogs, topical retinoids, topical 5-­fluorouracil, topical imiquimod, or oral retinoids [severe cases
only]); destructive therapy (liquid nitrogen cryotherapy, electrodessication and curettage, or various lasers); and surgical removal. In general, the less invasive topical agents should be attempted first. Good UV
protection should also be encouraged. Patients should be monitored
for malignant transformation.

PROGNOSIS

Typically, the course of porokeratosis is slowly progressive, with an
increase in size and number of individual lesions. Some cases undergo
spontaneous resolution, and infrequently porokeratosis lesions may
undergo malignant transformation into squamous cell carcinoma. At-­
risk lesions appear to be long-­standing (average 33.5 years duration),
large size, and location on limbs.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

698.12 Gianotti-­Crosti Syndrome (Papular
Acrodermatitis)

This distinctive eruption is benign and predominantly occurs in children younger than 5 years old about 1 week after a viral illness. Cases
are usually sporadic, but epidemics have been recorded. Skin lesions
are monomorphic, firm, dusky, or coppery red papules ranging in size
from 1 to 10 mm (Fig. 698.13), although there is considerable variation in lesion appearance between patients. The papules often have the
appearance of vesicles; however, when opened, no fluid is obtained.
The papules sometimes become hemorrhagic. Lines of papules (Koebner phenomenon) may be noted on the extremities after minor local
trauma. The papules occur in crops and may become profuse and
coalesce into plaques, forming a symmetric eruption on the face, ears,
buttocks, and limbs, including the palms and soles. The trunk is relatively spared, as are the scalp and mucous membranes. The eruption is
occasionally associated with malaise and low-­grade fever but few other
constitutional symptoms. The underlying viral infection may cause
signs and symptoms, such as lymphadenopathy and hepatomegaly in
patients with hepatitis B viremia. The eruption resolves spontaneously
but may take up to 2 months. Some residual pigment change may occur
but is not scarring.

HISTOLOGY

Skin biopsy in Gianotti-­Crosti syndrome is not specific, being characterized by a dermal perivascular mononuclear cell infiltrate, capillary
endothelial swelling, and epidermal spongiosis and parakeratosis.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Gianotti-­Crosti syndrome can be confused with other viral exanthems,
erythema infectiosum, lichen planus, erythema multiforme, and
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura (IgA vasculitis).

TREATMENT

The lesions are typically asymptomatic and resolve spontaneously, thus
requiring no treatment. If present, pruritus may be relieved by emollients or calamine lotion. Mid-­potency topical steroids may relieve
pruritus but do not alter disease course. Sedating antihistamines at
bedtime are also helpful.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu

698.13 Acanthosis Nigricans
ETIOLOGY/PATHOGENESIS

The pathogenesis of Gianotti-­Crosti syndrome, also known as papular
acrodermatitis, is unclear, but an immunologic reaction to viral infections and immunizations has been postulated. Historically, the most
common associations are with Epstein-­Barr virus, hepatitis B virus
(primarily in countries without routine childhood vaccination programs), coxsackievirus A16, and parainfluenza virus, as well as with
many childhood immunizations.

Julie M. Dhossche and Yvonne E. Chiu
See also Chapter 65.

ETIOLOGY/PATHOGENESIS

The skin lesions of acanthosis nigricans may be genetic due to variants
in the fibroblast growth factor receptor gene or acquired as a manifestation of insulin resistance. In familial cases, acanthosis nigricans

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 698 u Diseases of the Epidermis 4109

Fig. 698.15 Confluent and reticulated papillomatosis. Reticulate tan
Fig. 698.14 Velvety hyperpigmentation of the axilla in acanthosis nigricans.

papules, patches, and plaques involving the epigastrium, inframammary areas, and sternum. (From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical
Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022, Fig. 23.34,
p. 641.)

is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait and develops in infancy.
Insulin resistance with compensatory hyperinsulinism may lead to
insulin binding to and activation of insulin-­like growth factor receptors, promoting epidermal and fibroblast growth. Common causes of
insulin resistance in children are obesity and diabetes mellitus, with
acanthosis nigricans seen in >60% of children with a body mass index
>98%. Other endocrinopathies such as pituitary hypogonadism, Cushing syndrome, polycystic ovarian syndromes, thyroid disease, and
acromegaly, as well as certain drugs (insulin, oral contraceptives and
other sex hormones, nicotinic acid, corticosteroids, and heroin) are
also implicated as potential underlying causes. In the paraneoplastic
form (rare in children), tumor-­secreted growth factors induce acanthosis nigricans.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Acanthosis nigricans is characterized by symmetric, hyperpigmented,
velvety, hyperkeratotic plaques with exaggerated skin lines in intertriginous areas. The most common locations are the posterior neck
and axillae (Fig. 698.14), but it is also seen in the inframammary areas,
groin, inner thighs, and anogenital region. Before plaque development,
patients notice a “dirty” appearance of affected skin that does not wash
clean. Skin lesions remain asymptomatic unless maceration or secondary infection occurs. The clinical severity and histopathologic features
of acanthosis nigricans correlate positively with the degree of hyperinsulinism and with the degree of obesity. The differential diagnosis
includes confluent and reticulated papillomatosis (CARP), Addison disease, pellagra, and erythrasma. CARP is an idiopathic disorder
characterized by hyperpigmented papules with reticulation peripheral
to the papules and is commonly distributed in the intermammary
region (Fig. 698.15) and the epigastrium and upper back; less often it
involves the axilla (Fig. 698.16) or neck and face.

HISTOLOGY

The histologic changes are those of papillomatosis and hyperkeratosis
rather than acanthosis or excessive pigment formation. A mild dermal
inflammatory infiltrate may be present.

TREATMENT

Treatment is aimed at the underlying disorder. Acanthosis nigricans in the obese child is associated with risk factors for glucose

Fig. 698.16 Confluent and reticulated papillomatosis. Hyperpig-

mented thin plaques, which were confluent centrally and reticulated
at the periphery, were present in the bilateral axillae of this 16-­year-­old
male patient who also had classic acanthosis nigricans affecting the
neck folds. These axillary changes resolved completely with oral minocycline and lactic acid–containing emollients. (From Paller AS, Mancini
AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022, Fig. 23.35, p. 641.)

homeostasis abnormalities, and counseling families on its causes
and consequences may motivate them to make healthy lifestyle
changes that can decrease the risk for development of cardiac disease and diabetes mellitus. In children with obesity-­related acanthosis nigricans, weight loss should be the primary goal. If a drug
or malignancy is suspected, removal of that agent or treatment of
cancer typically results in resolution. Appearance of skin lesions
responds poorly to local medical management; some patients
benefit from topical keratolytic agents (40% urea cream or 12%
ammonium lactate cream) and agents that inhibit keratinocyte proliferation (topical retinoids and vitamin D analogs).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4110 Part XXIX u The Skin

Chapter 699

Disorders of
Keratinization
Kari L. Martin
DISORDERS OF CORNIFICATION

Mendelian disorders of cornification (ichthyoses) are a primary group
of inherited conditions characterized clinically by patterns of scaling
and histopathologically by hyperkeratosis. They are usually distinguishable by inheritance patterns, clinical features, associated defects,
and histopathologic changes (Tables 699.1, 699.2, and 699.3). The two
main categories of ichthyotic diseases are whether they are limited to
the skin or have syndromic associations.

COLLODION BABY

Collodion baby is not a single entity, but a newborn phenotype that is
most often seen in babies who eventually demonstrate lamellar ichthyosis or congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma (CIE). Less commonly,
collodion babies evolve into babies with Gaucher disease or neutral
lipid storage disease with ichthyosis, Loricrin keratoderma, trichothiodystrophy, Sjögren-­Larsson syndrome, Conradi-­Hünerman syndrome,
or harlequin ichthyosis. A small subset become otherwise healthy
babies without chronic skin disease (self-­healing collodion baby).
Collodion babies are covered at birth by a thick, taut membrane
resembling oiled parchment or collodion (Fig. 699.1), which is subsequently shed. Affected neonates have ectropion (eversion of the eyelid
away from the globe), flattening of the ears and nose, and fixation of the
lips in an O-­shaped configuration. Hair may be absent or may perforate
the abnormal covering. The membrane cracks with initial respiratory
efforts and, shortly after birth, begins to desquamate in large sheets.
Admission to a neonatal intensive care unit and a high-­humidity environment and application of nonocclusive lubricants facilitate shedding
of the membrane. Complete shedding may take several weeks, and a
new membrane may occasionally form in localized areas.
Neonatal morbidity and mortality may be due to cutaneous infection, aspiration pneumonia (squamous material), hypothermia, or
hypernatremic dehydration from excessive transcutaneous fluid losses
as a result of increased skin permeability. The outcome is uncertain,
and accurate prognosis depends on identification of the underlying
ichthyosis.

NONSYNDROMIC ICHTHYOSES
Ichthyosis Vulgaris
Etiology/Pathogenesis

Autosomal dominant or recessive pathogenic variants in the filaggrin
gene cause ichthyosis vulgaris. Filaggrin is a filament-­aggregating protein that assembles the keratin filament cytoskeleton, causing collapse
of the granular cells into a classic flattened squamous cell shape. Pathogenic variants in filaggrin lead to absence of or marked reductions in
keratohyalin granules (see Table 699.2).

Clinical Manifestations

Ichthyosis vulgaris is the most common of the disorders of keratinization, with an incidence of 1/250 live births. Onset generally occurs
in the first year of life. In most cases, it is trivial, consisting only of
slight roughening of the skin surface. Scaling is most prominent on the
extensor aspects of the extremities, particularly the legs (Fig. 699.2).
Flexural surfaces are spared, and the abdomen, neck, and face are relatively uninvolved. Keratosis pilaris—particularly on the upper arms
and thighs, accentuated markings, and hyperkeratosis on the palms
and soles—and atopy are relatively common. Scaling is most pronounced during the winter months and may abate completely during

warm weather. There is no accompanying disorder of hair, teeth, mucosal surfaces, or other organ systems; however, patients are at increased
risk of atopy.

Treatment

Scaling may be diminished by daily applications of an emollient or a
lubricant containing urea (10–40%), salicylic acid, or an alpha-­hydroxy
acid such as lactic acid (5–12%).

X-­Linked Ichthyosis
Etiology/Pathogenesis

X-­linked ichthyosis involves a deficiency of steroid sulfatase, which
hydrolyzes cholesterol sulfate and other sulfated steroids to cholesterol.
Cholesterol sulfate accumulates in the stratum corneum and plasma. In
the epidermis this accumulation causes malformation of intercellular
lipid layers, leading to barrier defects and delay of corneodesmosome
degradation, resulting in corneocyte retention.

Clinical Manifestations

Skin peeling may be present at birth but typically begins at 3-­6 months
of life. Scaling is most pronounced on the sides of the neck, lower face,
preauricular areas, anterior trunk, and the limbs, particularly the legs.
The elbow (Fig. 699.3) and knee flexures are generally spared but may
be mildly involved. The palms and soles may be slightly thickened but
are also usually spared. The condition gradually worsens in severity
and extent. Keratosis pilaris is not present, and there is no increased
incidence of atopy. Deep corneal opacities that do not interfere with
vision develop in late childhood or adolescence and are a useful marker
for the disease because they may also be present in carrier females.
Some patients have larger deletions on the X chromosome that encompass neighboring genes, generating contiguous gene deletion syndromes.
These include Kallmann syndrome (KAL1 gene), which consists of
hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism and anosmia, X-­linked chondroplasia punctata (ARSE gene), short stature, and ocular albinism. The
rate of testicular cancer may be increased in patients with coexistent
Kallmann syndrome. There is also an increased risk of attention-­
deficit/hyperactivity disorder and autism owing to a contiguous gene
defect in neuroligin 4.
Reduced steroid sulfatase enzyme activity can be detected in fibroblasts, keratinocytes, and leukocytes and, prenatally, in amniocytes
or chorionic villus cells. In affected families, an affected male can be
detected by restriction enzyme analysis of cultured chorionic villus cell
DNA or amniocytes or by in situ hybridization, which identifies steroid
sulfatase gene deletions prenatally in chorionic villus cells. A placental
steroid sulfatase deficiency in carrier mothers may result in low urinary and serum estriol values, prolonged labor, and insensitivity of the
uterus to oxytocin and prostaglandins.

Treatment

Daily application of emollients and a urea-­containing lubricant (10–
40%) is usually effective. Glycolic or lactic acid (5–12%) in an emollient
base and propylene glycol (40–60%) in water with occlusion overnight
are alternative forms of therapy.

AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE CONGENITAL
ICHTHYOSES
Harlequin Ichthyosis
Etiology/Pathogenesis

Harlequin ichthyosis is caused by pathogenic variants in the ABCA12
gene. Pathogenic variants in the gene lead to defective lipid transport,
and ABCA12 activity is required for the generation of long-­chain
ceramides that are essential for the development of the normal skin
barrier.

Clinical Manifestations

At birth, markedly thickened, ridged, and cracked skin forms horny
plates over the entire body, disfiguring the facial features and constricting the digits. Severe ectropion and chemosis obscure the orbits, the
nose and ears are flattened, and the lips are everted and gaping. Nails

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 699.1  Inherited Ichthyoses – Syndromic
DISORDER

PREVIOUS NAME

X-­LINKED ICHTHYOSIS SYNDROMES
RXLI (recessive X-­linked
ichthyosis) syndromic
presentation

Conradi-­Hünermann-­
Happle syndrome
(CDPX2)

CHILD syndrome

X-­linked
chondrodysplasia
punctata (Conradi-­
Hünermann
syndrome)

INHERITANCE

CUTANEOUS FINDINGS

EXTRACUTANEOUS FINDINGS

GENE DEFECT(S)

PROTEIN(S)

308100

XR

Large, dark scales
Sparing of body folds

Prolongation of labor
Cryptorchidism
Corneal opacities, asymptomatic

STS
Larger deletions with
contiguous gene
defects

Steroid sulfatase

398205

XR

Spiny follicular ichthyosis
Nail dystrophy
Alopecia

Photophobia
Psychomotor delay
Short stature

MBTPS2

Membrane-­bound
transcription
factor peptidase,
site 2

302960

XD

Striated ichthyosiform
hyperkeratosis
Follicular atrophoderma
Alopecia

Cataracts
Frontal bossing
Short proximal limbs

EBP

Emopamil-­binding
protein

308050

XD

Unilateral ichthyosiform
erythroderma

Chondrodysplasia punctata
Cataracts
Limb reduction defects
Asymmetric organ hypoplasia

NSDHL

3-­β-­hydroxysteroid-­
Δ8,Δ7-­isomerase

Atopic diathesis
Food allergies
Structural hair defects
(trichorrhexis invaginata)
Growth delay

SPINK5

LETKI

AUTOSOMAL ICHTHYOSIS SYNDROMES WITH PROMINENT HAIR ABNORMALITIES
NS (Netherton
256500
AR
Erythroderma in infancy
syndrome)
Ichthyosis linearis
circumflexa
Alopecia
610765

AR

Adherent platelike scale
Hypohidrosis
Hypotrichosis

Photophobia
Pingueculum

ST14

Serine protease 14

IHSC syndrome
(ichthyosis-­
hypotrichosis-­
sclerosing cholangitis)

607626

AR

Fine thin scale
Hypotrichosis with coarse
thick hair

Sclerosing cholangitis
Congenital paucity of bile ducts

CLDN1

Claudin 1

TTD
(trichothiodystrophy)

601675

AR

May have collodion
membrane
Can vary from mild scaling
to marked adherent
plaques

Photosensitivity
Brittle hair with “tiger tail” pattern
Decreased fertility
Short stature
Susceptibility to infection

ERCC2, XPD ERCC3,
XPB GTF2H5, TTDA

Xeropigmentosum
group D protein
Xeropigmentosum
group B protein

TTD (not associated with
congenital ichthyosis)

234050

AR

Delayed onset
Fine scale

Nonphotosensitive
Brittle hair
Short stature
Decreased fertility

C7Orf11, (TTDN1)

M-­phase–specific
PLK1-­interacting
protein,
(TTD non-­
photosensitive 1
protein)

Collodion baby, mild
scaling later

Hepatosplenomegaly retroflexion
of the head, strabismus,
dysphagia, choking spells,
hypertonicity
Death usually occurs in the first
year

GBA

Acid β-­glucosidase

AUTOSOMAL ICHTHYOSIS SYNDROMES WITH FATAL DISEASE COURSE
Gaucher syndrome,
230900
AR
type 2

Continued

4111

IHS (ichthyosis
hypotrichosis
syndrome)

Chapter 699 u Disorders of Keratinization

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

IFAP syndrome
(ichthyosis-­follicularis-­
atrichia-­photophobia)

MIM #

DISORDER

PREVIOUS NAME

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

MIM #

INHERITANCE

CUTANEOUS FINDINGS

EXTRACUTANEOUS FINDINGS

Multiple sulfatase
deficiency

272200

AR

Mild scale

Mental retardation
Mucopolysaccharidosis
Metachromatic leukodystrophy
Death within first year of life

SUMF1

Sulfatase-­
modifying
factor-­1

CEDNIK syndrome
(cerebral dysgenesis-­
neuropathy-­ichthyosis-­
palmoplantar
keratoderma)

609528

AR

Coarse platelike white
scale
Fine, sparse hair

Sensorineural deafness
Cerebral dysgenesis
Neuropathy
Microcephaly
Neurogenic muscle atrophy
Optic nerve atrophy
Cachexia
Lethal within first decade

SNAP29

Synaptosomal-­
associated
protein, 29kDA

ARC syndrome
(arthrogryposis-­
renal dysfunction-­
cholestasis)

208085

AR

Fine scale

Arthrogryposis
Intrahepatic bile duct hypoplasia
with cholestasis
Renal tubular degeneration
Metabolic acidosis
Abnormal platelet function
Death within first year of life

VPS33B

Vacuolar protein
sorting–
associated
protein 33B

Diplegia or tetraplegia
Retinal glistening white dots

ALDH3A2

Long-­chain
aldehyde
dehydrogenase

AUTOSOMAL ICHTHYOSIS SYNDROMES WITH OTHER ASSOCIATED SIGNS
SLS (Sjögren-­Larsson
270200
AR
Fine lamellar scale
syndrome)

GENE DEFECT(S)

PROTEIN(S)

RS (Refsum syndrome)
(HMSN4: hereditary
motor sensory
neuropathy type 4)

Refsum disease

266500

AR

Late onset, fine scale

Retinitis pigmentosa
Cardiac failure

PAHX or PHYH
PEX7

Phytanoyl-­CoA
hydroxylase
Peroxin-­7

KID syndrome
(keratitis-­ichthyosis-­
deafness syndrome)

KID; includes HID
syndrome

242150
602540

AD

Verrucous plaques
Stippled pattern of
keratoderma

Keratitis
Sensorineural deafness

GJB2 (GJB6)

Connexin 26

Neutral lipid storage
disease with ichthyosis

Chanarin-­Dorfman
syndrome (also
termed NCIE2)

275630

AR

Fine scales with occasional
background erythema

Myopathy
Hepatosplenomegaly

ABHD5

CGI-­58

IPS
(ichthyosis prematurity
syndrome)

608649

AR

White caseous scale,
attenuated on scalp and
eyebrows
Follicular keratosis

Atopic manifestations

SLC27A4

Long-­chain fatty
acid transport
protein 4

CHIME syndrome

280000

AR

Ichthyotic erythema
Occasionally migratory
plaques

Colobomas
Conductive hearing loss
Mental retardation

NK

NK

MEDNIK syndrome
(mental retardation-­
enteropathy-­deafness-­
neuropathy-­ichthyosis-­
keratodermia)

Not on
OMIM

AR

Rough, thickened skin

Congenital sensorineural deafness
Psychomotor and growth
retardation
Chronic diarrhea

AP1S1

Adapter-­related
protein complex
1 sigma-­1A
subunit

AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; XD, X-­linked dominant; XR, X-­linked recessive.
Modified from Foley CC, Paller AS, Irvine AD. Disorders of cornification (ichthyosis). In: Eichenfield LF, Frieden IJ, eds. Neonatal and Infant Dermatology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015: Table 19.1, p. 283–284.

4112 Part XXIX u The Skin

Table 699.1  Inherited Ichthyoses – Syndromic—cont’d

Chapter 699 u Disorders of Keratinization

4113

Table 699.2  Inherited Ichthyoses – Nonsyndromic
PREVIOUS
NAME

DISORDER

COMMON ICHTHYOSES
IV (ichthyosis vulgaris)

RXLI (recessive
X-­linked ichthyosis)
(nonsyndromic
presentation)

CUTANEOUS
FINDINGS

EXTRA­
CUTANEOUS
FINDINGS

GENE
DEFECT(S)

MIM #

INHERITANCE

146700

AD (autosomal
semidominant)

Fine, white scale
Accentuated
palmoplantar
markings

Strong
association
with atopic
manifestations

FLG

Filaggrin

308100

XR

Large, dark scales
Sparing of body
folds

Prolongation of
labor
Cryptorchidism
Corneal
opacities,
asymptomatic

STS

Steroid sulfatase

Rigid plates
Severe erythema
Hypohidrosis
Scarring alopecia

Ectropion
Eclabion
Contractures
Failure to thrive
Short stature

ABCA12

ATP-­binding
cassette,
subfamily a,
member 12

AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE CONGENITAL ICHTHYOSIS (ARCI)
MAJOR TYPES
HI (harlequin
242500
AR
ichthyosis)

PROTEIN(S)

LI (lamellar ichthyosis)

242300
601277
604777

AR

Large adherent
plates
Hypohidrosis

Ectropion
Eclabium
Short stature if
severe

TGM1,
ABCA12,
PNPLA1,
LIPN

Transglutaminase
1, ABCA12
transporter,
PNPLA1, lipase N

CIE (congenital
ichthyosiform
erythroderma)

242100

AR

Fine white scales
Background
erythema
Hypohidrosis
Mild PPK
White nails

Failure to thrive
Short stature if
severe
Occasional
neurologic
deficits

TGM1,
ALOX12B,
ALOXE3,
ABCA12,
CYP4F22,
NIPAL4

Transglutaminase 1
Arachidonate
lipoxygenases,
cytochrome
P450 enzyme,
ichthyin, ABCA12
transporter

242300

AR

Collodion baby
at birth, not
subsequent
ichthyotic
phenotype

None

TGM1,
ALOX12B,
ALOXE3

Keratinocyte
transglutaminase 1

Acral SHCB (self-­
healing collodion
baby)

242300

AR

Acral collodion
membranes that
heal

None

TGM1

Transglutaminase 1

BSI (bathing suit
ichthyosis)

242300

AR

Collodion
None
membrane at birth,
extremities heal

TGM1

Transglutaminase 1

AD, rarely AR

Widespread skin
blistering in
neonates
Warty
hyperkeratosis

Growth failure if
severe

KRT1, KRT10

Keratins 1 and 10

146800

AD

Mild flexural
hyperkeratosis
Adherent fine scale
Pruritus

None

KRT2E

Keratin 2

MINOR VARIANTS
AEI (annular
epidermolytic
ichthyosis)

607602

AD

Intermittent
annular, polycyclic
erythematous
scaly plaques

KRT1, KRT10

Keratins 1 and 10

ICM (ichthyosis Curth-­ Ichthyosis
Macklin)
hystrix

146590
146600

AD

Spiky
hyperkeratosis

KRT1

Keratin 1

Epidermolytic
epidermal nevi

Not in
OMIM

Somatic
pathogenic
variants

KRT1, KRT10

Keratins 1 and 10

MINOR VARIANTS
SHCB (self-­healing
collodion baby)

KERATINOPATHIC ICHTHYOSIS (KPI)
MAJOR TYPES
EI (epidermolytic
BCIE/EH
113800
ichthyosis)

SEI (superficial EI)

Ichthyosis
bullosa
of
Siemens

None

Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4114 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 699.2  Inherited Ichthyoses – Nonsyndromic—cont’d
PREVIOUS
NAME

DISORDER

CUTANEOUS
FINDINGS

EXTRA­
CUTANEOUS
FINDINGS

GENE
DEFECT(S)

MIM #

INHERITANCE

604117

AD

Collodion baby
Mild, fine, white
scale
Diffuse PPK

None

LOR

Loricrin

EKV
(erythrokeratoderma
variabilis)

133200

AD

Transient, migratory
erythematous
patches
Hyperkeratosis
Diffuse PPK

None

GJB3, GJB4

Connexins 31, 30.3

PSD (peeling skin
disease)

270300

AR

None

CDSN,
TGM5

Corneodesmin,
Transglutaminase 5

CRIE (congenital
reticular
ichthyosiform
erythroderma)

609165

AD (isolated
cases)

None

KRT10

Keratin

KLICK (keratosis
linearis-­ichthyosis
congenita-­
keratoderma)

Not in
OMIM

AR

None

POMP

Proteasome
maturation
protein

OTHER FORMS
LK (loricrin
keratoderma)

Linear keratoses in
skin folds
Sclerosing PPK

PROTEIN(S)

AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; XR, X-­linked recessive.
Modified from Foley CC, Paller AS, Irvine AD. Disorders of cornification (ichthyosis). In: Eichenfield LF, Frieden IJ, eds. Neonatal and Infant Dermatology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2015: Table 19.2, p. 285–286.

Table 699.3  Differential Diagnosis of Netherton Syndrome: Disorders with Ichthyosis and Alopecia
(Hereditary Disorders Only)*
FEATURES RESEMBLING NETHERTON
SYNDROME

DIFFERENTIATION FROM
NETHERTON SYNDROME

DSG1

CIE with PPK, no collodion membrane;
failure to thrive; hypernatremia; barrier
defect; dermatitis; high IgE; malabsorption;
eosinophilic esophagitis; multiple food
allergies; recurrent infections; hypotrichosis;
hypoalbuminemia

May have microcephaly, growth
hormone deficiency, developmental
delay, cardiac defects; psoriasiform
dermatitis with acantholysis in skin
sections; absence of desmoglein

AR
Loss-­of-­function
pathogenic
variants

ADAM17

Psoriasiform erythroderma/widespread
pustules; failure to thrive; malabsorption;
short, broken hair; recurrent infections

Bloody diarrhea; cardiomyopathy/
cardiomyositis

EGFR deficiency

AR
Loss-­of-­function
pathogenic
variants

EGFR

Erythema, scaling, and widespread pustules;
alopecia; failure to thrive, watery diarrhea,
high IgE and eosinophils, hypernatremia,
hypoalbuminemia; recurrent bronchiolitis

Cardiovascular issues

Trichothiodystrophy

AR
Loss-­of-­function
pathogenic
variants

ERCC2,
ERCC3,
GTF2H5,
C7Orf11

CIE-­like ichthyosis; short, brittle hair; “tiger tail”
hair shaft defect under polarized microscopy

May have impaired intelligence,
decreased fertility, short stature,
and photosensitivity

IHS (also called
autosomal
recessive
ichthyosis with
hypotrichosis
[ARIH] syndrome)

AR
Loss-­of-­function
pathogenic
variants

ST14 (encodes
matriptase);
abnormal
filaggrin
processing

Generalized, congenital ichthyosis with sparing
of face, palms, and soles; diffuse nonscarring
alopecia of scalp, eyelashes, and eyebrows
from birth, but improves to sparse, unruly hair
during adolescence and merely recession of
the frontal hair line by adulthood

May have patchy follicular
atrophoderma and hypohidrosis;
photophobia from corneal
abnormalities; blepharitis; dental
abnormalities; hair microscopy may
show pili torti or pili bifurcati

IHSC (or NISCH)
syndrome

AR
Loss-­of-­function
pathogenic
variants

CLDN1
(encodes
claudin 1,
structural
protein
of tight
junctions)

Congenital generalized scaling, predominantly
on the limbs and abdomen and sparing
skinfolds, palms, and soles; coarse, curly hair
with frontotemporal cicatricial alopecia

Congenital paucity of bile ducts
or sclerosing cholangitis leads
to neonatal jaundice with
hepatomegaly; oligodontia, and
enamel dysplasia; blood smears
show small eosinophils and
keratinocyte vacuoles without lipid
contents

DISORDER

INHERITANCE

SAM syndrome

AR
Loss-­of-­function
pathogenic
variants

ADAM17 deficiency

GENE

*Netherton syndrome must also be distinguished from severe atopic dermatitis and immunodeficiency disorders.
AR, Autosomal recessive; CIE, congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma; Ig, immunoglobulin; IHS, ichthyosis hypotrichosis syndrome; IHSC, ichthyosis-­hypotrichosis-­sclerosing
cholangitis; NISCH, neonatal ichthyosis sclerosing cholangitis; PPK, palmoplantar keratoderma; SAM, severe dermatitis, multiple allergies, and metabolic wasting.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 699 u Disorders of Keratinization

Fig. 699.1 Typical appearance of a collodion baby.

4115

Fig. 699.4 Generalized scaling of lamellar ichthyosis.
Intubation may be required until nares are patent and parenteral nutrition
required until eclabium has resolved. Consultation with ophthalmology
is often required given the extensive ectropion. If constrictive bands are
around the digits, debridement may be performed to prevent ischemia.

Lamellar Ichthyosis and Congenital Ichthyosiform
Erythroderma (Nonbullous Congenital Ichthyosiform
Erythroderma)

Fig. 699.2 Scale over the shin in ichthyosis vulgaris.

Lamellar ichthyosis and CIE (nonbullous congenital ichthyosiform
erythroderma; non-­harlequin ichthyosis autosomal recessive congenital ichthyoses [ARCI]) are the most common types of autosomal recessively inherited ichthyosis. Both forms are present at or shortly after
birth. Most infants with these forms of ichthyosis present with erythroderma and scaling, but among collodion babies, most turn out to have
one of these ichthyosis variants.

Etiology/Pathogenesis

Six genes have been identified that cause non-­harlequin ichthyosis
ARCI: TGM (the gene encoding transglutaminase), ABCA12, NIPAL4
(also known as ICHTHYIN), CYP4F22, and the lipoxygenase genes
ALOX12B and ALOXE3. Transglutaminase pathogenic variants lead to
abnormalities in the cornified envelope, whereas defects in ABCA12
cause abnormal lipid transport and those in CYP4F22 produce abnormal lamellar granules. The lipoxygenases are likely to play a role in epidermal barrier formation by affecting lipid metabolism.

Clinical Manifestations

Fig. 699.3 Sparing of the antecubital fossa in X-­linked ichthyosis.
and hair may be absent. Joint mobility is restricted, and the hands
and feet appear fixed and ischemic. Affected neonates have respiratory difficulty, suck poorly, and are subject to severe cutaneous infection. Harlequin ichthyosis used to be uniformly fatal in the neonatal
period, but with the use of oral retinoids, more patients survive (∼80%)
beyond infancy and have severe ichthyosis usually resembling lamellar ichthyosis or nonbullous CIE as adolescents and adults. Those with
a compound heterozygous genotype have a better prognosis. Prenatal
diagnosis has been accomplished by fetoscopy, fetal skin biopsy, and
microscopic examination of cells from amniotic fluid.

Treatment

Initial treatment includes high fluid intake to avoid dehydration from
transepidermal water loss and use of a humidified heated incubator,
emulsifying ointments, careful attention to hygiene, and oral retinoids.

After shedding of the collodion membrane, if present, lamellar ichthyosis evolves into large, quadrilateral, dark scales that are free at the edges
and adherent at the center. Scaling is often pronounced and involves
the entire body surface, including flexural surfaces (Fig. 699.4). The
face is often markedly involved, including ectropion and small, crumpled ears. The palms and soles are generally hyperkeratotic. The hair
may be sparse and fine, but the teeth and mucosal surfaces are normal.
Unlike in CIE, there is little erythema.
In CIE, erythroderma tends to be persistent, and scales, although
they are generalized, are finer and whiter than in lamellar ichthyosis (Fig. 699.5). Hyperkeratosis is particularly noticeable around the
knees, elbows, and ankles. Palms and soles are uniformly hyperkeratotic. Patients have sparse hair, cicatricial alopecia, and nail dystrophy.
Neither form includes blistering.

Treatment

Pruritus may be severe and responds minimally to antipruritic therapy. The unattractive appearance of the child and the bad odor from
bacterial colonization of macerated scales may cause severe emotional
distress. A high-­humidity environment in winter and air conditioning in summer reduce discomfort. Generous and frequent applications of emollients and keratolytic agents such as lactic or glycolic acid
(5–12%), urea (10–40%), tazarotene (0.1% gel), and retinoic acid (0.1%
cream) may lessen the scaling to some extent, although these agents

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4116 Part XXIX u The Skin

A
Fig. 699.5 Prominent erythema and scale in congenital ichthyosiform
erythroderma.

B
Fig. 699.7 Erythrokeratoderma variabilis. A, Fixed, hyperkeratotic
plaques. B, Migratory, erythematous lesion.

Fig. 699.6 Superficial erosions and hyperkeratosis in epidermolytic
hyperkeratosis.

produce stinging if applied to fissured skin. Oral retinoids have a beneficial effect in these conditions but do not alter the underlying defect
and therefore must be administered indefinitely. The long-­term risks of
these compounds (teratogenic effects and toxicity to bone) may limit
their usefulness. Ectropion requires ophthalmologic care and, at times,
plastic surgical procedures.

KERATINOPATHIC ICHTHYOSES
Epidermolytic Ichthyosis (Bullous Congenital
Ichthyosiform Erythroderma; Epidermolytic
Hyperkeratosis)
Etiology/Pathogenesis

Epidermolytic ichthyosis is an autosomal dominant trait that has been
shown to be due to defects in either keratin 1 or keratin 10. These keratins are required to form the keratin-­intermediate filaments in cells of
the suprabasilar layers of the epidermis.

Clinical Manifestations

The clinical manifestations are initially characterized by the onset
at birth of widespread blisters and erosions on a background of
generalized erythroderma (Fig. 699.6). Recurrent blistering may be
widespread in neonates and may cause diagnostic confusion with
other blistering disorders. With time, the blister formation ceases,
erythema decreases, and generalized hyperkeratosis develops. The
scales are small, hard, and verrucous. Distinctive, parallel hyperkeratotic ridges develop over the joint flexures, including the axillary,
popliteal, and antecubital fossae, and on the neck and hips. Palmoplantar keratoderma (PPK) is associated with keratin 1 defects.
The hair, nails, mucosa, and sweat glands are normal. Malodorous
secondary bacterial infection is common and requires appropriate
antibiotic therapy.

Histopathology

The histopathology is diagnostic of epidermolytic ichthyosis, consisting
of hyperkeratosis, degeneration of the epidermal granular layer with an
increased number of keratohyalin granules, clear spaces around nuclei,
and indistinct cellular boundaries of cells in the upper epidermis. On
electron microscopic examination, keratin-­intermediate filaments are
clumped, and many desmosomes are attached to only one keratinocyte
instead of connecting neighboring keratinocytes. Localized forms of
the disease may resemble epidermal nevi or keratoderma of the palms
and soles but share the distinctive histopathologic changes of epidermolytic ichthyosis.

Treatment

Treatment of epidermolytic ichthyosis is difficult. Morbidity is
increased in the neonatal period as a result of prematurity, sepsis, and
fluid and electrolyte imbalance. Bacterial colonization of macerated
scales produces a distinctive bad odor that can be controlled somewhat
by use of an antibacterial cleanser. Intermittent oral antibiotics are
generally necessary. Keratolytic agents are often poorly tolerated. Oral
retinoids may produce significant improvement. Prenatal diagnosis for
affected families is possible by examination of DNA extracts from chorionic villus cells or amniocytes, provided that the specific pathogenic
variant in the affected parent is known.

OTHER NONSYNDROMIC ICHTHYOSES
Erythrokeratoderma Variabilis
Etiology/Pathogenesis

An autosomal dominant disorder, erythrokeratoderma variabilis
(EKV), is caused by pathogenic variants in connexins 31 and 30.3.
Connexins are proteins that form gap junctions between cells that
allow for transport and signaling between neighboring epidermal cells.

Clinical Manifestations

EKV usually manifests in the early months of life, progresses in childhood,
and stabilizes in adolescence. It is characterized by two distinctive manifestations: sharply demarcated, hyperkeratotic plaques (Fig. 699.7A)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 699 u Disorders of Keratinization

4117

and transient figurate erythema (see Fig. 699.7B). The distribution is
generalized but sparse; sites of predilection are the face, buttocks, axillae, and extensor surfaces of the limbs. The palms and soles may be
thickened, but hair, teeth, and nails are normal.

Treatment

There are case reports that topical tazarotene gel 0.1% and oral retinoids are effective for treatment of EKV.

Symmetric Progressive Erythrokeratoderma
Etiology/Pathogenesis

Symmetric progressive erythrokeratoderma is an autosomal dominant
disorder caused by pathogenic variants in the gene encoding loricrin.
Loricrin is a major component of the epidermal cornified cell envelope.

Clinical Manifestations

The disorder manifests in childhood as large, fixed, geographic and
symmetric, fine, scaling, hyperkeratotic, erythematous plaques primarily on the extremities, buttocks, face, ankles, and wrists. The primary
feature distinguishing this disorder from EKV is the lack of variable
erythema seen in the latter condition.

Fig. 699.8 Serpiginous, erythematous, hyperkeratotic lesions of
ichthyosis linearis circumflexa.

Treatment

Symmetric progressive erythrokeratoderma is a very rare disorder, but
reports of response to topical and oral retinoids exist.

SYNDROMIC ICHTHYOSES
Sjögren-­Larsson Syndrome
Etiology/Pathogenesis

The autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism known as
Sjögren-­Larsson syndrome is an abnormality of fatty alcohol oxidation that results from a deficiency of fatty aldehyde dehydrogenase
(FALDH3A2), a component of the fatty alcohol–nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide oxidoreductase enzyme complex (see Table 699.1).

Clinical Manifestations

The clinical picture of Sjögren-­Larsson syndrome consists of ichthyosis, cognitive impairment, and spasticity. The ichthyosis is generalized
but is accentuated on the flexures and the lower abdomen and consists
of erythroderma, fine scaling, larger platelike scales, and dark hyperkeratosis. The degree of scale varies markedly from patient to patient.
Most individuals have palmoplantar hyperkeratosis. The skin changes
may be identical to the other forms of ichthyosis, and diagnosis is often
delayed until the onset of neurologic symptoms. Pruritus is severe, and
hypohidrosis is common. Glistening dots in the foveal area are a cardinal ophthalmologic sign. About half the patients have primary retinal degeneration. Motor and speech developmental delays are usually
noted before 1 year of age, and spastic diplegia or tetraplegia, epilepsy,
and intellectual disability generally become evident in the first to third
years of life. Some patients may walk with the aid of braces, but most
are confined to wheelchairs. This deficiency can be demonstrated in
cultured skin fibroblasts of affected patients and carriers and, prenatally, in cultured chorionic villus cells and amniocytes from affected
fetuses. Elevation of urinary leukotriene B4 (LTB4) may provide an
easier approach to diagnosis.

Treatment

Treatment is similar to the other forms of ichthyosis (humectants,
emollients, topical or oral retinoids); 5-­lipoxygenase inhibitors have
been used to decrease pruritus.

Netherton Syndrome
Etiology/Pathogenesis

A rare autosomal recessive disorder, Netherton syndrome is caused by
pathogenic variants in the SPINK 5 gene, which encodes a serine protease inhibitor (LEKT1).

Clinical Manifestations

Netherton syndrome is characterized by ichthyosis (usually ichthyosis
linearis circumflexa, but occasionally the lamellar or congenital types

Fig. 699.9 Very short scalp hair and thick scale in Netherton
syndrome.

of ichthyosiform erythroderma), trichorrhexis invaginata and other
hair shaft anomalies, and atopic diathesis. The disorder manifests at
birth or in the first few months of life as generalized erythema and
scaling. The trunk and limbs have diffuse erythema and superimposed
migratory, polycyclic, and serpiginous hyperkeratotic lesions (Fig.
699.8), some with a distinctive double-­edged margin of scale. Lichenification or hyperkeratosis tends to persist in the antecubital and popliteal fossae. The face and scalp may remain erythematous and scaling.
Many hair shaft deformities, most notably trichorrhexis invaginata,
have been described in most patients with Netherton syndrome.
The ichthyosis is present in the first 10 days of life and may be
especially marked around the eyes, mouth, and perineal area. The
erythroderma is often intensified after infection. Infants may suffer
from failure to thrive, recurrent bacterial and candidal infections,
elevated serum immunoglobulin IgE values, and marked hypernatremic dehydration. The most frequent allergic manifestations are
urticaria, angioedema, atopic dermatitis, and asthma. Scalp hair is
sparse and short and fractures easily (Fig. 699.9); eyebrows, eyelashes, and body hair are also abnormal. The characteristic hair
abnormality can be identified with light microscopy; in the newborn, it may best be identified in eyebrow hair. The differential
diagnosis is noted in Table 699.3.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4118 Part XXIX u The Skin
Treatment

Owing to the inflammatory nature of the skin disease, oral antihistamines and topical steroids, as used in the treatment of atopic dermatitis, are helpful for Netherton syndrome.

Refsum Syndrome

See Chapters 106.2 and 653.5.

Etiology/Pathogenesis

There are two types of Refsum syndrome. The classic form is autosomal recessive and caused by pathogenic variants in the PAHX gene
that result in an increase in phytanic acid. The infantile forms of Refsum syndrome are also autosomal recessive and caused by pathogenic
variants in the PEX1, PEX2, or PEX26 genes. These are peroxisomal
abnormalities that lead to an increase in very long-­chain fatty acids,
di-­and tri-­hydroxycholestanoic acid, and pipecolic acid, as well as
phytanic acid.

Fig. 699.10 Limb dysplasia and ichthyosiform eruption in CHILD
(congenital hemidysplasia with ichthyosiform erythroderma and limb
defects) syndrome.

Clinical Manifestations

Refsum syndrome is a multisystem disorder that becomes symptomatic in the second or third decade of life. The ichthyosis may be
generalized, is relatively mild, and resembles ichthyosis vulgaris. The
ichthyosis may also be localized to the palms and soles. Chronic polyneuritis with progressive paralysis and ataxia, retinitis pigmentosa,
anosmia, deafness, bony abnormalities, and electrocardiographic
changes are the most characteristic features. The condition is diagnosed through lipid analysis of the blood or skin, which shows elevated phytanic acid values.
The infantile form begins, as suggested by the name, early in life, and
in addition to the changes seen in the classic form, affected patients
have hepatomegaly, abnormal bile acid profiles, developmental delay,
and cognitive impairment.

Treatment

Phytanic acid is exclusively derived from dietary chlorophyll. Lifelong
dietary avoidance of phytanic acid–containing products leads to clinical improvement in classic Refsum syndrome.

Chondrodysplasia Punctata
See Chapter 106.2.

Etiology/Pathogenesis

Chondrodysplasia punctata (CPD) is a clinically and genetically
heterogeneous condition. X-­linked dominant CPD, also known as
Conradi-­Hünermann syndrome, is the best-­characterized form. There
is also an X-­linked recessive form caused by a pathogenic variant in the
ARSE gene. Rhizomelic CPD type 1 is an autosomal recessive disorder
caused by pathogenic variants in the PEX7 gene, which encodes the
PTS2 receptor. CPD can also be caused by maternal vitamin K deficiency or warfarin teratogenicity.

Clinical Manifestations

These heterogeneous disorders are marked by ichthyosis and bone
changes. Nearly all patients with the X-­linked dominant form and
approximately 25% of those with the recessive type have cutaneous
lesions, ranging from severe, generalized erythema and scaling to
mild hyperkeratosis. Rhizomelic CPD is associated with cataracts,
hypertelorism, optic nerve atrophy, disproportionate shortening of
the proximal extremities, psychomotor retardation, failure to thrive,
and spasticity; most affected patients die in infancy. Patients with the
X-­linked dominant form have asymmetric, variable shortening of the
limbs and a distinctive ichthyosiform eruption at birth. Thick, yellow,
tightly adherent, keratinized plaques are distributed in a whorled pattern over the entire body. The eruption typically resolves in infancy
and may be superseded by a follicular atrophoderma and patchy
alopecia.
Additional features in all variants include cataracts and abnormal
facies with saddle nose and frontal bossing. The pathognomonic defect,
termed CPD, is stippled epiphyses in the cartilaginous skeleton. This

Fig. 699.11 Palmar keratoderma with epidermolytic changes seen on
biopsy.

defect, which is seen in various settings and inherited disorders, often
in association with peroxisomal deficiency and disturbance of cholesterol biosynthesis, disappears by 3-­4 years of age.

OTHER SYNDROMES WITH ICHTHYOSIS

A number of other rare syndromes with ichthyosis as a consistent feature include the following: keratitis with ichthyosis and deafness (KID
syndrome, connexin 26 gene), ichthyosis with defective hair having a
banded pattern under polarized light and a low sulfur content (trichothiodystrophy), multiple sulfatase deficiency, neutral lipid storage disease with ichthyosis (Chanarin-­Dorfman syndrome; CGI58 gene), and
CHILD syndrome (Fig. 699.10; congenital hemidysplasia with ichthyosiform erythroderma and limb defects; NSDHL gene).

Palmoplantar Keratodermas

Excessive hyperkeratosis of the palms and soles may occur as a manifestation of a focal or generalized congenital hereditary skin disorder
or may result from such chronic skin diseases as psoriasis, eczema,
pityriasis rubra pilaris, lupus erythematosus, or postinfectious arthritis
syndrome.

Diffuse Hyperkeratosis of Palms and Soles
(Unna-­Thost, Vorner)

Unna-­Thost and Vorner type PPKs, although clinically inseparable, were thought to be separate entities. They were separated
histologically by the presence (Vorner) or absence (Unna-­Thost)
of epidermolytic hyperkeratosis. They represent the clinical
spectrum of the same disease caused by pathogenic variants in
keratin (KRT1 and KRT9 genes). This autosomal dominant disorder manifests in the first few months of life as erythema that

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 700 u Diseases of the Dermis
gradually progresses to sharply demarcated, hyperkeratotic, scaling plaques over the palms (Fig. 699.11) and soles. The margins
of the plaques often remain red; plaques may extend along the
lateral aspects of the hands and feet and onto the volar wrists
and the heels. Hyperhidrosis is usually present, but hair, teeth, and
nails are usually normal. Striate (DSG1, DSP, KRT1 genes) and
punctate forms of palmar and plantar hyperkeratosis represent distinct entities.

Mal De Meleda (SLURP-­1 Gene)

A rare, progressive autosomal recessive condition, mal de Meleda
is characterized by erythema and thick scales on the palms, fingers,
soles, and flexor aspects of the wrists, knees, and elbows. Hyperhidrosis, nail thickening or koilonychia, and eczema may also occur.

Vohwinkel Palmoplantar Keratoderma (Mutilating
Keratoderma)

Vohwinkel PPK is a progressive autosomal dominant disease consisting of honeycombed hyperkeratosis of palms and soles, sparing the
arches; starfish-­like and linear keratoses on the dorsum of the hands,
fingers, feet, and knees; and ainhum-­like constriction of the digits that
sometimes leads to autoamputation. Varying degrees of alopecia may
be seen. Two forms have been identified. Vohwinkel PPK with ichthyosis is caused by pathogenic variants in the loricrin gene, and Vohwinkel
PPK with deafness by pathogenic variants in connexin 26.

Papillon-­Lefèvre Syndrome (Cathepsin C Gene)

An autosomal recessive erythematous hyperkeratosis of the palms
and soles, Papillon-­Lefèvre syndrome sometimes extends to the dorsal hands and feet, elbows, and knees later in childhood. The PPK
may be either diffuse, striate, or punctuate. This syndrome is characterized by periodontal inflammation, leading to loss of teeth by age
4-­5 years if untreated.

Other Syndromes

Keratoderma of palms and soles also occurs as a feature of some forms
of ichthyosis and ectodermal dysplasia. Richner-­Hanhart syndrome
is an autosomal recessive focal PPK with corneal ulcers, progressive
mental impairment, and a deficiency of tyrosine aminotransferase,
which leads to tyrosinemia. Pachyonychia congenita is transmitted
as an autosomal dominant trait with variable expressivity. The classic
type I form (Jadassohn-­Lewandowski syndrome) is due to pathogenic
variants in the gene for keratin 16. Major features of the syndrome
are onychogryphosis; PPK; follicular hyperkeratosis, especially of the
elbows and knees; and oral leukokeratosis. The nail dystrophy is the
most striking feature and may be present at birth or develop early
in life. The nails are thickened and tubular, projecting upward at the
free edge to form a conical roof over a mass of subungual keratotic
debris. Repeated paronychial inflammation may result in shedding of
the nails. The feature seen most consistently among patients with this
condition is keratoderma of the palms and soles. Additional associated
features include hyperhidrosis of the palms and soles and bullae and
erosions on the palms and soles. Some patients have shown a selective
cell-­mediated defect in recognition and processing of Candida. Surgical removal of the nails and excision of the nail matrix have been helpful in some patients.

Chapter 700

Diseases of the Dermis
Jacquelyn R. Sink and Yvonne E. Chiu
KELOID
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Keloids are usually induced by trauma and commonly follow ear
piercing, burns, scalds, and surgical procedures. The resulting
keloid is larger than the initial area of trauma to the skin. Certain
individuals are predisposed to keloid formation; a familial tendency
(recessive or dominant inheritance) or the presence of foreign material in the wound may have a pathogenic role. Keloids are a rare feature of Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome, Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome, and
pachydermoperiostosis. Keloids result from an abnormal fibrous
wound-­healing response in which tissue repair and regeneration-­
regulation control mechanisms are lost. Collagen production is 20
times that seen in normal scars, and the type I:III collagen ratio is
abnormally high. In keloids, tissue levels of tumor growth factor-­β
and platelet-­
derived growth factor are elevated; fibroblasts are
more sensitive to their effects, and their degradation rate is
decreased.

Clinical Manifestations

A keloid is a sharply demarcated, benign, dense growth of connective tissue that forms in the dermis after trauma. The lesions are firm,
raised, pink to hyperpigmented, and rubbery; they may be tender or
pruritic. Sites of predilection are the face, earlobes (Fig. 700.1), neck,
shoulders, upper trunk, sternum, and lower legs. Unlike hypertrophic
scars, keloids frequently recur after attempted removal and outgrow
the original boundaries of the wound.

Histology

A keloid consists of whorled and interlaced hyalinized collagen
fibers.

Differential Diagnosis

Keloids should be differentiated from hypertrophic scars, which remain
confined to the site of injury and may involute over time.

Treatment

Treatment for PPK is the same no matter what its cause. In mild
cases, emollient therapy may suffice. Keratolytic agents such as salicylic acid, lactic acid, and urea creams may be required. Oral retinoids are the treatment of choice for severe cases unresponsive to
topical therapy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

4119

Fig. 700.1 Keloid of earlobe after piercing.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4120 Part XXIX u The Skin
Treatment

Treatment of keloids is difficult. Young keloids may diminish in size
if injected intralesionally at 4-­week intervals with triamcinolone suspension (10-­40 mg/mL). At times, a more concentrated suspension
is required. Large or old keloids may require surgical excision followed by serial intralesional injections of corticosteroid; however,
recurrence rates are high. Earlobe keloids may respond favorably to
surgical excision followed by use of pressure earrings and serial intralesional steroid injections. Silicone scar sheeting may help in some
patients. Other therapeutic modalities that have been used with variable success include laser therapy, radiation therapy, and intralesional
injection of bleomycin, interferon, verapamil, or fluorouracil.

STRIAE CUTIS DISTENSAE (STRETCH MARKS)
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Striae formation is common in adolescence. The most frequent causes
are rapid growth, pregnancy, obesity, Cushing disease, and prolonged use
of systemic or topical corticosteroid therapy. They may also be seen in
patients with Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome. The pathogenesis is unknown,
but alterations in collagen and elastic fibers are thought to play a role.

Clinical Manifestations

Striae appear as linear, depressed, pink bands of atrophic skin that
eventually become silvery, opalescent, and smooth. They occur
most frequently in areas subject to distention, such as the lower back
(Fig. 700.2), buttocks, thighs, breasts, abdomen, and shoulders.

Differential Diagnosis

Striae distensae resemble atrophic scars.

Treatment

Striae tend to spontaneously become less conspicuous as the color
fades with time, and treatment is not necessary.

CORTICOSTEROID-­INDUCED ATROPHY
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Both topical and systemic corticosteroid treatment can result in cutaneous atrophy. This is particularly common when a potent or superpotent
topical corticosteroid is applied under occlusion or to an intertriginous
area for a prolonged period. Keratinocyte growth is decreased, but
epidermal maturation is accelerated, resulting in thinning of the epidermis and stratum corneum. Fibroblast growth and function are also
decreased, leading to dermal changes. The mechanism involves inhibition of synthesis of collagen type I, noncollagenous proteins, and total
protein content of the skin, along with progressive reduction of dermal
proteoglycans and glycosaminoglycans.

Clinical Manifestations

Affected skin is thin, fragile, smooth, and semitransparent, with telangiectasia, prominent veins, and loss of normal skin markings.

Fig. 700.2 Striae on the back of an adolescent.

Histology

On histology, thinning of the epidermis is present. Spaces between dermal collagen and elastic fibers are small, producing a more compact yet
thin dermis.

Treatment

Optimal treatment is prevention by monitoring and educating on the
proper use of topical steroids to avoid side effects.

GRANULOMA ANNULARE
Etiology and Pathogenesis

The cause of granuloma annulare (GA) is unknown. A possible association with diabetes mellitus has been proposed, particularly with the
generalized form of GA; however, this hypothesis is controversial and
has not been confirmed in children.

Clinical Manifestations

This common dermatosis occurs predominantly in healthy children
and young adults. Typical lesions begin as firm, smooth, erythematous papules. They gradually enlarge to form annular plaques with a
papular border and a normal, slightly atrophic or discolored central
area up to several centimeters in size. Lesions may occur anywhere
on the body, but mucous membranes are notably spared. Favored
sites include the dorsum of the hands (Fig. 700.3) and feet. The disseminated papular form is rare in children. Subcutaneous GA tends
to develop on the scalp and limbs, particularly in the pretibial area.
These lesions are firm, usually nontender, skin-­colored nodules.
Perforating GA is characterized by the development of grouped
papules, some with a yellowish, crusted, or scaly center, and occur
because of transepidermal elimination of altered collagen.

Differential Diagnosis

Annular lesions are often mistaken for tinea corporis due to the elevated, advancing border; however, GA characteristically lacks scale.
Papular lesions may simulate rheumatoid nodules, particularly when
grouped on the fingers and elbows.

Histology

The lesions of GA demonstrate granuloma formation on histology with
a central area of necrotic collagen, mucin deposition, and a peripheral palisading infiltrate of lymphocytes, histiocytes, and foreign body
giant cells. The pattern resembles that of necrobiosis lipoidica and
rheumatoid nodules, but subtle histologic differences usually permit
differentiation.

Treatment

The eruption persists for months to years, but spontaneous resolution without residual change is typical; approximately 50% of lesions
clear within 2 years. Application of a potent or superpotent topical
corticosteroid preparation or intralesional injections (5-­10 mg/mL)

Fig. 700.3 Annular lesion with a raised papular border and depressed
center, characteristic of granuloma annulare.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 700 u Diseases of the Dermis
of corticosteroid may hasten involution, but nonintervention is also
appropriate.

NECROBIOSIS LIPOIDICA
Etiology and Pathogenesis

The cause of necrobiosis lipoidica (NL) is unclear, but 50–75% of
patients have diabetes mellitus, though NL occurs in less than 1% of
all diabetic patients. NL has also been noted in patients with obesity,
hypertension, and dyslipidemias. Its presence may signify a higher risk
for diabetic complications such as nephropathy and retinopathy.

Clinical Manifestations

This disorder manifests as erythematous papules that evolve into irregularly shaped, sharply demarcated, erythematous to yellow, sclerotic
plaques with central telangiectasias and a violaceous border. Scaling,
crusting, and ulceration may occur. Lesions develop most commonly
on the anterior tibial surfaces (Fig. 700.4). Slow extension of a given
lesion over the years is usual, but long periods of quiescence or complete healing with scarring may occur.

Histology

Poorly defined areas of necrobiotic collagen are seen on microscopic evaluation, primarily low in the dermis with mucin deposition. Surrounding the necrobiotic, disordered areas of collagen
is a palisading lymphohistiocytic granulomatous infiltrate. Some
lesions are more characteristically granulomatous, with limited
necrobiosis of collagen.

Differential Diagnosis

NL must be differentiated clinically from xanthomas, morphea, GA,
erythema nodosum, and pretibial myxedema.

Treatment

The lesions of NL usually persist despite good control of the diabetes
but may improve minimally after applications of high-­potency topical
steroids or local injection of a corticosteroid. Ulcerated areas should be
managed with meticulous wound care. Pentoxifylline and antiplatelet
therapy with aspirin have also been used.

LICHEN SCLEROSUS
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Lichen sclerosus (LS) is a chronic inflammatory dermatosis whose
cause is largely unknown. Several studies have identified the presence
of autoantibodies against the glycoprotein extracellular matrix protein
1 (ECM-­1).

Clinical Manifestations

Lichen sclerosus (LS) manifests as shiny, ivory-­colored, flat-­topped
papules, often with a violaceous halo. The surface shows prominent
dilated pilosebaceous or sweat duct orifices that may contain yellow

Fig. 700.4 Yellow sclerotic plaque of necrobiosis lipoidica on the
shin.

4121

or brown follicular plugs. The papules coalesce to form irregular
plaques of variable size, and hemorrhagic bullae can be seen in the
margins. In the later stages, atrophy results in a depressed plaque
with a wrinkled surface. This disorder occurs more commonly in
girls than in boys. Sites of predilection in girls are the vulvar (Fig.
700.5), perianal, and perineal skin. Extensive involvement may
produce an atrophic plaque of hourglass configuration; shrinkage
of the labia and stenosis of the introitus may result. Erythema and
purpura are possible. Vaginal discharge precedes vulvar lesions in
approximately 20% of patients. In boys, the prepuce and glans penis
are often involved, usually in association with phimosis (balanitis
xerotica obliterans); most boys with the disorder were not circumcised early in life. Commonly involved extragenital sites include
the upper trunk, neck, axillae, flexor surfaces of wrists, and areas
around the umbilicus and the eyes. Pruritus, pain, and dysuria may
be severe, and constipation due to withholding may occur.

Differential Diagnosis

In children, LS is most frequently confused with focal morphea
(see Chapter 201), with which it may coexist. In the genital area,
it may be mistakenly attributed to sexual abuse, irritant dermatitis,
or vulvovaginitis. The vitiligoid form associated with depigmentation must be differentiated from vitiligo or postinflammatory
hypopigmentation.

Histology

Biopsy is rarely necessary but shows hyperkeratosis with follicular
plugging, hydropic degeneration of basal cells, a bandlike dermal lymphocytic infiltrate, homogenized collagen, and thinned elastic fibers in
the upper dermis.

Treatment

Vulvar LS in childhood usually improves with puberty but does not
always resolve completely, and symptoms can recur throughout life.
Long-­term observation for the development of squamous cell carcinoma is necessary in patients with later disease onset or persistence
beyond puberty. Superpotent topical corticosteroids are the treatment of choice, including for the genital area, providing relief from
pruritus and producing clearing of lesions. Topical tacrolimus and
pimecrolimus have also been used. It is not known how response to
treatment affects long-­term cancer risk.

MORPHEA
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Morphea is an autoimmune sclerosing condition of the dermis and
subcutaneous tissue of unknown etiology.

Clinical Manifestations

Morphea is characterized by solitary, multiple, or linear circumscribed
areas of erythema that evolve into indurated, sclerotic, atrophic plaques,
with or without a lilac border (Fig. 700.6). Affected areas may resolve

Fig. 700.5 Ivory-­colored perivaginal plaque with hemorrhage.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4122 Part XXIX u The Skin
phototherapy, mycophenolate mofetil, and other therapies are also
used. Physical therapy is recommended in linear morphea involving
a joint to maintain mobility. Significant postinflammatory pigment
alteration may persist for years.

SCLEREDEMA (SCLEREDEMA ADULTORUM,
SCLEREDEMA OF BUSCHKE)
Etiology and Pathogenesis

The cause of scleredema is unknown. There are three types. Type 1
(55% of cases) is preceded by a febrile illness, often related to an upper
or lower respiratory infection (most commonly streptococcus). Type 2
(25%) is associated with paraproteinemia, including multiple myeloma.
Type 3 (20%) is seen in diabetes mellitus.
Fig. 700.6 Erythematous, hyperpigmented plaque of early morphea.

Clinical Manifestations

Fifty percent of patients with scleredema are younger than 20 years
old. Onset of type 1 is sudden, with brawny edema of the face
and neck that spreads rapidly to involve the thorax and arms in a
sweater distribution; the abdomen and legs are usually spared. The
face acquires a waxy, masklike appearance. The involved areas feel
indurated and woody, are nonpitting, and are not sharply demarcated from normal skin. The overlying skin is normal in color and
is not atrophic.
Type 2 and type 3 scleredema may occur insidiously. Systemic
involvement, which is uncommon and usually associated with types
2 and 3, is marked by thickening of the tongue, dysarthria, dysphagia, restriction of eye and joint movements, and pleural, pericardial,
and peritoneal effusions. Electrocardiographic changes may also be
observed. Laboratory data are not helpful.

Differential Diagnosis
Fig. 700.7 Linear morphea with involvement over the ankle.

Scleredema must be differentiated from scleroderma (see Chapter
201), morphea, myxedema, trichinosis, dermatomyositis, sclerema
neonatorum, and subcutaneous fat necrosis.

Histology
without sequelae or with subsequent atrophy and/or pigment change.
Morphea is seen more commonly in females. Five types of morphea have
been described: circumscribed, linear, generalized, mixed, and pansclerotic; the most common types in children are circumscribed and linear.
Morphea can affect any area of skin. When confined to the frontal scalp,
forehead, and midface in a linear band, it is referred to as en coup de sabre.
When located on one side of the face, it is termed progressive hemifacial atrophy, also known as Parry-­Romberg syndrome. These forms of
morphea carry a poorer prognosis because of the associated underlying
central nervous system involvement or musculoskeletal atrophy that can
be cosmetically disfiguring. Linear morphea over a joint may lead to limb
undergrowth or restriction of mobility (Fig. 700.7). Pansclerotic morphea
is a rare, severe, disabling variant.

Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of morphea includes GA, NL, LS, and late-­
stage European Lyme borreliosis (acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans).

Histology

Thickening or sclerosus of the dermis with collagen degeneration is
seen.

Treatment

Morphea tends to persist, with gradual outward expansion for months
to years until spontaneous cessation of the inflammatory phase occurs.
Topical calcipotriene, alone or in combination with high-­potency to
superpotency topical steroids or topical tacrolimus, has been used for
less severe disease. For severe morphea, methotrexate with or without pulsed intravenous or oral glucocorticosteroids may halt progression and help shorten the disease course. Ultraviolet A-­1 (UVA-­1)

Skin biopsy demonstrates an increase in dermal thickness due to
swelling and homogenization of the collagen bundles, which are
separated by large interfibrous spaces. Special stains can identify increased amounts of mucopolysaccharides in the dermis of
patients with scleredema.

Treatment

In type 1 scleredema, the active phase of the disease persists for 2-­8
weeks. Spontaneous and complete resolution usually occurs after 6
months to 2 years. Recurrent attacks are unusual. In types 2 and 3,
the disease is slowly progressive. There is no specific therapy.

LIPOID PROTEINOSIS (URBACH-­WIETHE DISEASE,
HYALINOSIS CUTIS ET MUCOSAE)
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Lipoid proteinosis is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by pathogenic variants in the ECM-­1 gene, which encodes ECM-­1. ECM-­1 has
a functional role in the structural organization of the dermis by binding to perlecan, matrix metalloproteinase 9, and fibulin. Pathogenesis
involves infiltration of hyaline material into the skin, oral cavity, larynx, and internal organs.

Clinical Manifestations

Lipoid proteinosis presents initially in early infancy as hoarseness
due to vocal cord involvement. Skin lesions appear during childhood
and consist of yellowish papules and nodules that may coalesce to
form plaques. The classic sign is a string of beaded papules on the
eyelids. Lesions also occur on the face, forearms, neck, genitals, dorsum of the fingers, and scalp, where they result in patchy alopecia.
Similar deposits are found on the lips, leading to eversion of the lips,
as well as the undersurface of the tongue, fauces, uvula, epiglottis,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 700 u Diseases of the Dermis

4123

and vocal cords. The tongue becomes enlarged and feels firm on palpation. The patient may be unable to protrude the tongue. Pocklike,
atrophic scars may develop on the face. Hypertrophic, hyperkeratotic
nodules and plaques occur at sites of friction, such as the elbows and
knees; the palms may be diffusely thickened. The disease progresses
until early adult life, but the prognosis is good. Symmetric calcification lateral to the sella turcica in the medial temporal region, identifiable roentgenographically as bilateral bean-­shaped opacities, is
pathognomonic but is not always present. Involvement of the larynx
can lead to respiratory compromise, particularly in infancy, necessitating tracheostomy. Associated anomalies include dental abnormalities, epilepsy, and recurrent parotitis because of infiltrates in the
Stensen duct. Virtually any organ can be involved.

Histology

The distinctive histologic pattern in lipoid proteinosis includes dilation
of dermal blood vessels and infiltration of homogeneous eosinophilic
extracellular hyaline material along capillary walls and around sweat
glands. Hyaline material in homogeneous bundles, diffusely arranged
in the upper dermis, produces a thickened dermis. The infiltrates
appear to contain both lipid and mucopolysaccharide substances.

Treatment

There is no specific treatment for lipoid proteinosis.

MACULAR ATROPHY (ANETODERMA)
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Anetoderma is characterized by circumscribed areas of slack skin associated with loss of dermal substance. This disorder may have no associated underlying disease (primary macular atrophy) or may develop
after an inflammatory skin condition. Secondary macular atrophy may
be a result of direct destruction of dermal elastin or elastolysis on an
immunologic basis, especially in the presence of antiphospholipid antibodies, which are related to autoimmune disorders. The elastolysis may
then be a result of release of elastase from inflammatory cells.

Clinical Manifestations

Lesions vary from 0.5 to 1.0 cm in diameter and, if inflammatory, may
initially be erythematous. They subsequently become thin, wrinkled, and
blue-­white or hypopigmented. The lesions often protrude as small outpouchings that, on palpation, may be readily indented into the subcutaneous tissue because of the dermal atrophy. Sites of predilection include the
trunk, thighs, upper arms, and, less commonly, the neck and face. Lesions
remain unchanged for life; new lesions often continue to develop for years.

Histology

All types of macular atrophy show focal loss of elastic tissue on histopathologic examination, a change that may not be recognized unless
special stains are used.

Differential Diagnosis

Lesions of anetoderma occasionally resemble morphea, LS, focal dermal hypoplasia, atrophic scars, or end-­stage lesions of chronic bullous
dermatoses.

Treatment

There is no effective therapy for macular atrophy.

PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is a genetic metabolic disease linked
to pathogenic variants in the ABCC6 gene. The primary abnormality
seen in PXE is mineralization of tissue in the skin, Bruch membrane in
the retina, and vessel walls. Cutaneous manifestations of PXE may be
present in generalized arterial calcification of infancy.

Fig. 700.8 Confluent plaque of pebbly skin in pseudoxanthoma elasticum.

Clinical Manifestations

Onset of skin manifestations often occurs during childhood, but the
changes produced by early lesions are subtle and may not be recognized. The characteristic pebbly, “plucked chicken skin” cutaneous
lesions are 1-­to 2-­mm, asymptomatic, yellow papules arranged in a linear or reticulated pattern or in confluent plaques. Preferred sites are the
flexural neck (Fig. 700.8), axillary and inguinal folds, umbilicus, thighs,
and antecubital and popliteal fossae. As the lesions become more pronounced, the skin acquires a velvety texture and droops in lax, inelastic folds. The face is usually spared. Mucous membrane lesions may
involve the lips, buccal cavity, rectum, and vagina. There is involvement
of the connective tissue of the media and intima of blood vessels, Bruch
membrane of the eye, and endocardium or pericardium, which may
result in visual disturbances, angioid streaks in the Bruch membrane,
irregular mottling of the retinal epithelium, intermittent claudication,
cerebral and coronary occlusion, hypertension, and hemorrhage from
the gastrointestinal tract, uterus, or mucosal surfaces. Women with
PXE have an increased risk of miscarriage in the first trimester. Arterial involvement generally manifests in adulthood, but claudication
and angina have occurred in early childhood.

Pathology

Histopathologic examination shows fragmented, swollen, and clumped
elastic fibers in the middle and lower third of the dermis. The fibers
stain positively for calcium. Collagen near the altered elastic fibers is
reduced in amount and is split into small fibers. Aberrant calcification
of the elastic fibers of the internal elastic lamina of arteries in PXE leads
to narrowing of vessel lumina.

Treatment

There is no effective treatment for PXE, although laser therapy, with or
without intravitreal injection of vascular endothelial growth factor antagonists, may help prevent retinal hemorrhage. The use of oral phosphate
binders has shown mixed results in decreasing calcification of elastic fibers.

ELASTOSIS PERFORANS SERPIGINOSA
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Elastosis perforans serpiginosa (EPS) is characterized by the extrusion
of altered elastic fibers through the epidermis. The primary abnormality is probably in the dermal elastin, which provokes a cellular response
that ultimately leads to extrusion of the abnormal elastic tissue.

Clinical Manifestations

This is an unusual skin disorder in which 1-­to 3-­mm, firm, skin-­
colored, keratotic papules tend to cluster in arcuate and annular
patterns on the posterolateral neck and limbs (Fig. 700.9) and occasionally on the face and trunk. Onset usually occurs in childhood or

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4124 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 700.9 Arcuate keratotic papule of elastosis perforans serpiginosa.

Fig. 700.10 Hyperkeratotic papules in reactive perforating collagen-

osis.

adolescence. A papule consists of a circumscribed area of epidermal
hyperplasia that communicates with the underlying dermis by a narrow channel. There is a great increase in the amount and size of elastic
fibers in the upper dermis, particularly in the dermal papillae. Approximately 30% occur in association with osteogenesis imperfecta, Marfan syndrome, PXE, Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome, Rothmund-­Thomson
syndrome, scleroderma, acrogeria, and Down syndrome. EPS has also
occurred in association with penicillamine therapy.

Treatment

Histology

See Chapter 653.6.

Histopathology reveals a hyperplastic epidermis with extrusion of
abnormal elastic fibers and a lymphocytic superficial infiltrate.

Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of EPS includes tinea corporis, perforating
GA, reactive perforating collagenosis, lichen planus, creeping eruption,
and porokeratosis of Mibelli.

Treatment

Treatment of EPS is ineffective; however, the lesions are asymptomatic
and may disappear spontaneously.

REACTIVE PERFORATING COLLAGENOSIS
Etiology and Pathogenesis

The primary process in reactive perforating collagenosis represents
transepidermal elimination of altered collagen. A familial autosomal
recessive form has been described.

Clinical Manifestations

Reactive perforating collagenosis usually manifests in early childhood as small papules on the dorsal areas of the hands and forearms, elbows, knees, and, sometimes, the face and trunk. Over a
period of several weeks, the papules enlarge to 5-­10 mm, become
umbilicated, and develop keratotic plugs centrally (Fig. 700.10).
Individual lesions resolve spontaneously in 2-­4 months, leaving
hypopigmented macules or scars. Lesions may recur in crops, linearly as a part of the Koebner phenomenon, or in response to cold
temperatures or superficial trauma such as abrasions, insect bites,
and acne lesions.

Histology

Collagen in the papillary dermis is engulfed within a cup-­shaped perforation in the epidermis. The central crater contains pyknotic inflammatory cells and keratinous debris.

Differential Diagnosis

EPS and Kyrle disease may mimic reactive perforating collagenosis.

Reactive perforating collagenosis resolves spontaneously in 6-­8 weeks.
Narrow-­band ultraviolet B (UVB) light may help with pruritus and
hasten resolution.

XANTHOMAS
See Chapter 105.

FABRY DISEASE
MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSES

See Chapter 109.
Several of the mucopolysaccharidoses are characterized by thickened, rough, inelastic skin, particularly on the extremities, and generalized hypertrichosis but are nonspecific features. Extensive and
persistent dermal melanocytosis has been described in children with
Hurler and Hunter syndromes. Telangiectasias on the face, forearms, trunk, and legs have been observed in Scheie and Morquio
syndromes. In some patients with Hunter syndrome, ivory-­colored,
distinctive, firm dermal papules and nodules with corrugated surface texture are grouped into symmetric plaques on the upper trunk
(Fig. 700.11), arms, and thighs. Onset of these unusual lesions occurs
in the first decade of life, and spontaneous disappearance has been
noted.

MASTOCYTOSIS
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Mastocytosis encompasses a clinical spectrum of disorders that
range from solitary cutaneous nodules to diffuse infiltration of skin
associated with involvement of internal organs (Table 700.1). All
of the disorders are characterized by aggregates of mast cells in the
dermis. There are four types of mastocytosis: mastocytomas (three
or fewer lesions), urticaria pigmentosa (more than three lesions,
also known as maculopapular cutaneous mastocytosis), diffuse
cutaneous mastocytosis, and telangiectasia macularis eruptiva perstans (TMEP). Increased expression of stem cell factor (also called
kit ligand or mast cell growth factor) stimulates the proliferation of
mast cells and increases the production of melanin by melanocytes.
Some forms of mastocytosis are associated with activating pathogenic variants (most commonly the D816V variant) in the KIT gene.
The local and systemic manifestations of the disease are at least
partly a result of the release of histamine and heparin from mast
cell granules; although heparin is present in significant amounts in
mast cells, coagulation disturbances occur only rarely. The vasodilator prostaglandin D2 or its metabolite appears to exacerbate the
flushing response. Serum tryptase values may be elevated, but not
consistently.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 700 u Diseases of the Dermis

Fig. 700.11 Ivory-­colored papules on the upper back in Hunter syndrome.

Table 700.1  Mastocytosis Classification
CUTANEOUS MASTOCYTOSIS
Urticaria pigmentosa/maculopapular cutaneous mastocytosis
Diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis
Solitary mastocytoma
SYSTEMIC MASTOCYTOSIS
Indolent mastocytosis
Smoldering mastocytosis
Aggressive mastocytosis
Systemic mastocytosis with associated hematologic non–mast cell
lineage (AHN) disease
Mast cell leukemia
MAST CELL SARCOMA
Modified from Valent P, Akin C, Metcalfe D. Mastocytosis: 2016 Updated WHO
classification and novel emerging treatment concepts. Blood. 2017;129:1420–1427,
Table 2.

4125

stroking of a lesion can usually be elicited; dermographism of intervening normal skin is also common. Affected children can have intense
pruritus. Systemic signs of histamine release, such as anaphylaxis-­like
episodes, hypotension, syncope, headache, episodic flushing, tachycardia, wheezing, colic, and diarrhea, are uncommon and occur most
frequently in the more severe types of mastocytosis. Flushing is by far
the most common symptom.
The second type of urticaria pigmentosa may begin in childhood
but typically develops in adulthood. This type does not resolve, and
new lesions continue to develop throughout life. Patients with this type
of mastocytosis may develop systemic involvement.
Systemic mastocytosis is marked by an abnormal increase in the
number of mast cells in numerous organ systems and is uncommon
in children. Bone lesions are often silent (but may be painful) and
are detectable radiologically as osteoporotic or osteosclerotic areas,
principally in the axial skeleton. Gastrointestinal tract involvement
may lead to abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, steatorrhea, and bloating. Mucosal infiltrates may be detectable by barium
studies or by small bowel biopsy. Peptic ulcers also occur. Hepatosplenomegaly due to mast cell infiltrates and fibrosis has been
described, as has mast cell proliferation in lymph nodes, kidneys,
periadrenal fat, and bone marrow. Abnormalities in the peripheral
blood, such as anemia, leukocytosis, and eosinophilia, are noted in
approximately 30% of patients. Mast cell leukemia may occur.
Diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis is characterized by diffuse
involvement of the skin rather than discrete hyperpigmented lesions.
Affected patients are usually normal at birth and demonstrate features
of the disorder after the first few months of life. Rarely, the condition may present with intense generalized pruritus in the absence of
visible skin changes. The skin usually appears thickened, pink to yellow in color, doughy, or with a peau d’orange texture. Surface changes
are accentuated in flexural areas. Recurrent bullae (see Fig. 700.12),
intractable pruritus, and flushing attacks are common, as is systemic
involvement.
Telangiectasia macularis eruptiva perstans (TMEP) is a variant of
mastocytosis that consists of telangiectatic, hyperpigmented macules
usually localized to the trunk. These lesions do not urticate when stroked.
This form of the disease is seen primarily in adolescents and adults.

Differential Diagnosis
Clinical Manifestations

Mastocytomas are usually 1-­5 cm in diameter. Lesions may be present
at birth or may arise in early infancy at any site. The lesions may manifest as recurrent, evanescent wheals or bullae; in time, an infiltrated,
pink, yellow, or tan, rubbery plaque develops at the site of whealing or
blistering (Fig. 700.12). The surface acquires a pebbly, orange peel–like
texture, and hyperpigmentation may become prominent. Mechanical
irritation of the lesion may lead to urtication (Darier sign) within a few
minutes due to local histamine release; rarely, systemic signs of histamine release become apparent.
Urticaria pigmentosa is the most common form of mastocytosis in
children. In the first type of urticaria pigmentosa, the classic infantile
type, lesions may be present at birth but more often erupt in crops in
the first several months to 2 years of age. New lesions seldom arise after
age 3-­4 years. In some cases, early bullous or urticarial lesions fade,
only to recur at the same site, ultimately becoming fixed and hyperpigmented. In others, the initial lesions are hyperpigmented. Vesiculation
usually abates by 2 years of age. Individual lesions range in size from
a few millimeters to several centimeters and may be macular, papular, or nodular. They range in color from yellow-­tan to red-­brown and
often have ill-­defined borders (see Fig. 700.12). Larger nodular lesions,
like solitary mastocytomas, may have a characteristic peau d’orange
(orange peel–like) texture. Lesions of urticaria pigmentosa may be
sparse or numerous and are often symmetrically distributed. Palms,
soles, and face are usually spared, as are the mucous membranes. The
rapid appearance of erythema and wheals in response to vigorous

The differential diagnosis of solitary mastocytomas includes recurrent
bullous impetigo, herpes simplex, congenital melanocytic nevi, and
juvenile xanthogranuloma.
Urticaria pigmentosa can be confused with drug eruptions, postinflammatory pigmentary change, juvenile xanthogranuloma, pigmented
nevi, ephelides, xanthomas, chronic urticaria, insect bites, and bullous
impetigo. Diffuse cutaneous mastocytoma may be confused with epidermolytic hyperkeratosis. TMEP must be differentiated from other
causes of telangiectasia.
The systemic manifestations of mastocytosis may mimic pheochromocytoma, carcinoid syndrome, vasoactive intestinal peptide–
secreting tumors, vasculitis, autoinflammatory diseases, hyper-­
IgE
syndrome, somatization disorder, autonomic dysfunction, angioedema, chronic urticaria, and anaphylaxis.

Prognosis

Spontaneous involution usually occurs in patients with solitary mastocytomas and classic infantile urticaria pigmentosa. The incidence of
systemic manifestations in these patients is very low. The mean duration of urticaria pigmentosa is around 10 years. A larger number of
lesions early in life may lead to later resolution.

Treatment

Solitary mastocytomas usually do not require treatment. Lesions that
blister may be treated with topical steroids after each blistering episode.
In urticaria pigmentosa, flushing can be precipitated by excessively
hot baths, vigorous rubbing of the skin, and certain drugs, such as

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4126 Part XXIX u The Skin
A

H

B

C

I

D

J

K

E

L

F

M

G

N

Fig. 700.12 Clinical features and histologic findings in childhood mastocytosis. Diagnosis of mastocytosis in children is often obvious, and skin
biopsy is rarely performed. The histologic diagnosis of cutaneous mastocytosis must consider the increased number and proportion of mast cells
compared to other inflammatory cells. Mast cells can be rounded, cuboidal, fusiform, or histiocyte-­like. Eosinophils may be observed in all mastocytosis subtypes. The epidermis may be hyperpigmented in urticaria pigmentosa (UP) and diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis (DCM), whereas it is normal
in mastocytoma. A-­E, Types of urticaria pigmentosa. A, Maculopapular UP. B, Plaque-­type UP. C, Extensive UP with plaques and macules. D, Skin
biopsy: increased number and proportion of mast cells around the vessels or scattered into the dermis, dilatation of the capillaries of the superficial
dermis. E, c-­Kit staining. F-­J, Mastocytoma. F, Mastocytoma localized on the hand. G, Mastocytoma localized on the forearm. H, I, Skin biopsy:
abundant and diffuse infiltration of mast cells throughout the dermis. Mast cells are always recognizable, with a large, pink, and granular cytoplasm
and a round, dense, central nucleus. J, c-­Kit staining. K-­N, DCM. K, Diffuse infiltration of skin. L, Extensive bullous lesions associated with infiltration
on the back. M, Skin biopsy: diffuse dermal infiltration of mast cells associated with some fibrosis and dilated capillaries. N, c-­Kit staining. (From Méni
C, Bruneau J, Georgin-­Lavialle S, et al. Paediatric mastocytosis: a systematic review of 1747 cases. Br J Dermatol. 2015;172:642–651, Fig. 1, p. 643.)

Table 700.2  Pharmacologic Agents and Physical Stimuli
that May Exacerbate Mast Cell Mediator
Release in Patients with Mastocytosis
Venoms (bee stings, jellyfish stings, snake bites)
Complement-­derived anaphylatoxins
Biologic peptides (substance P, somatostatin, vasoactive intestinal
polypeptide)
Polymers (dextran)
Physical stimuli (heat, cold, exertion, friction, trauma, vibration, sunlight)
Acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin), ibuprofen, and related nonsteroidal
analgesics*
Alcohol
General anesthetics (D-­tubocurarine, scopolamine, decamethonium,
gallamine, pancuronium)
Polymyxin B
Local anesthetics (lidocaine, tetracaine procaine, methylparaben
preservative)
Sympathomimetics
Opiates (codeine, morphine)*
Radiographic dyes (iodine-­containing)
Other drugs (papaverine, dipyridamole, trimethaphan, amphotericin
B, quinine, thiamine, dextromethorphan, lactam, antibiotics,
vancomycin)
Stress (sleep deprivation, anxiety, pain)
*Appears to be a problem in <10% of patients.
Modified from Carter MC, Metcalfe DD. Paediatric mastocytosis. Arch Dis Child.
2002;86:315–319, Table 4.

codeine, aspirin, morphine, atropine, ketorolac, alcohol, tubocurarine, iodine-­containing radiographic dyes, and polymyxin B (Table
700.2). Avoidance of these triggering factors is advisable; it is notable
that general anesthesia may be safely performed with appropriate
precautions.
For patients who are symptomatic, oral antihistamines may be palliative. H1 receptor antagonists are the initial drugs of choice for systemic signs of histamine release. If H1 antagonists are unsuccessful, H2
receptor antagonists may be helpful in controlling pruritus or gastric

hypersecretion. Topical steroids are of benefit in controlling skin urtication
and blistering. Oral mast cell–stabilizing agents, such as cromolyn sodium
or ketotifen, may also be effective for diarrhea or abdominal cramping and
with systemic symptoms such as headache or muscle pain. Midostaurin,
an inhibitor of receptor tyrosine kinase KIT, may be effective in patients
with systemic mastocytosis associated with hematologic malignancy. A
premeasured epinephrine pen kit may be considered for those individuals
at higher risk for anaphylaxis such as systemic disease, extensive cutaneous
disease, high baseline tryptase levels, and known allergies.
For patients with diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis, treatment is similar to urticaria pigmentosa. Phototherapy with narrow-­band UV (UVB
or UVA-­1) or psoralen with UVA treatment may be useful.
Lesions of TMEP may be cautiously treated with vascular pulsed dye
lasers.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

700.1 Mast Cell Activation Syndrome
James J. Nocton
Mast cell activation (MCA) occurs in several defined conditions,
including primary mast cell disorders, allergic reactions, systemic
inflammatory diseases, and drug reactions, and results in the release
of multiple proinflammatory mediators, including tryptase, histamine,
prostaglandins, and leukotrienes. The effects of these mediators lead to
the clinical symptoms of MCA, which may range from mild to severe
and may involve multiple organ systems, including the cutaneous, gastrointestinal, respiratory, and cardiovascular systems (Table 700.3). The
term mast cell activation syndrome (MCAS) has been used to describe a
condition associated with symptoms, signs, and laboratory abnormalities that are consistent with the effects of mast cell mediators; it is recurrent, usually severe, and involves multiple organ systems and responds
to treatment with medications that are known to inhibit mast cells or
secreted mast cell mediators. Consensus criteria for the diagnosis and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 700 u Diseases of the Dermis
Table 700.3  Common Symptoms in Patients with Mast
Cell Mediator Disorders
Cardiovascular: chest pain, hypotension, hypotensive syncope,
tachycardia
Dermatologic: angioedema, dermatographism, flushing, pruritus,
urticaria pigmentosa
Gastrointestinal: abdominal cramping/pain, bloating, diarrhea,
esophagitis, nausea, vomiting
Musculoskeletal: bone/muscle pain, degenerative disc disease,
osteoporosis/osteopenia
Naso-­ocular: nasal congestion, pruritus, tearing
Neurologic: headache, memory and concentration difficulties (brain
fog), paresthesia, peripheral neuropathy
Respiratory: hoarseness, sore throat, stridor, throat swelling,
wheezing
Systemic: anaphylaxis, fatigue
From Theoharides TC, Tsilioni I, Ren H. Recent advances in our understanding of mast
cell activation – or should it be mast cell mediator disorders? Expert Rev Clin Immunol.
2019;15(6):639–656, Table 1.

Table 700.4  Consensus Criteria for the Diagnosis of Mast
Cell Activation Syndrome (MCAS)*
Criterion A: Typical clinical signs of severe, recurrent (episodic)
systemic MCA are present (often in the form of anaphylaxis)
(definition of systemic: involving at least two organ systems)
Criterion B: Involvement of MC is documented by biochemical
studies: preferred marker: increase in serum tryptase level from the
individual’s baseline to plus 20% + 2 ng/mL†
Criterion C: Response of symptoms to therapy with MC-­stabilizing
agents, drugs directed against MC mediator production or drugs
blocking mediator release or effects of MC-­derived mediators‡

4127

Table 700.5  Facial Flushing Etiologies
FLUSHING WITH FOOD
• Alcohol
• Monosodium glutamate (MSG)
• Sulfites
• Scrombroidosis
• Auriculotemporal syndrome (Frey syndrome gustatory flushing)
• Postherpetic gustatory flushing
• Nitrates
• Capsaicin
• Tyramine-­containing foods
ENDOCRINE
• Carcinoid
• Pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma
• Medullary thyroid carcinoma
• Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (VIP)
• Cushing syndrome
• Perimenopause
• Thyrotoxicosis
OTHER
• Mastocytosis
• Urticaria pigmentosa
• Mast cell activation syndrome
• Harlequin syndrome
• Congenital Horner syndrome
• Idiopathic anaphylaxis
• Panic attacks
• Blushing/anxiety
• Spinal cord injury/autonomic dysregulation
• Niacin supplements

*All three MCAS criteria (A + B + C) must be fulfilled to call a condition MCAS.
†Other MC-­derived markers of MCA (histamine and histamine metabolites, PGD
2

metabolites, and heparin) have also been proposed but are less specific compared
to tryptase.
‡Example: histamine receptor blockers.
From Valent P, Akin C, Bonadonna P, et al. Proposed diagnostic algorithm for patients
with suspected mast cell activation syndrome (MCAS). J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract.
2019;7(4):1125–1133, Table I, p. 1126.

classification of MCAS have been developed (Table 700.4). Under this
classification, MCAS is designated primary when it is associated with
a defined mast cell disorder such as systemic or cutaneous mastocytosis; it is termed secondary when it is recognized in the context of an
allergen or another disease known to be associated with MCA; and it
is designated idiopathic when neither a primary mast cell disorder nor
another associated disease is present.
Patients fulfilling the consensus criteria for MCAS must have
recurrent clinical manifestations consistent with MCA. Cutaneous
symptoms have included urticaria, angioedema, itching, and frequent skin flushing (Table 700.5). Gastrointestinal symptoms such
as abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea are common.
Tachycardia, sometimes with hypotension and syncope, may be
frequent, and some patients have wheezing episodes and rhinitis.
Nonspecific and constitutional symptoms have also been described,
including headache, fatigue, chronic pain, paresthesias, anxiety,
and depression. These nonspecific symptoms most likely represent
comorbidities.
Patients diagnosed with MCAS have biochemical evidence indicating mast cell mediator release. Laboratory abnormalities that might
indicate MCA include elevated serum tryptase and increases in 24-­
hour urinary histamine metabolites (N-­methylhistamine), the prostaglandin D2 metabolite 2,3-­dinor-­11-­β-­PGF2-­α, or the leukotriene
metabolite LTE4. The current consensus criteria for the diagnosis of
MCAS includes an increase in serum tryptase as the preferred measurement documenting mast cell mediator release (see Table 700.4).

Additional biochemical markers have been proposed but remain either
of unknown or questionable reliability as markers of MCA.
MCAS has been classified into three groups: primary, secondary,
and idiopathic. Primary MCAS refers to patients with clonal proliferation of mast cells resulting from pathogenic variants in the KIT gene
and is usually associated with systemic or cutaneous mastocytosis. A
small percentage of those with primary MCAS have clonal proliferation of mast cells but may not completely fulfill the criteria to diagnose systemic or cutaneous mastocytosis. Secondary MCAS refers to
patients with either an IgE-­dependent allergy, a non–IgE-­mediated
hypersensitivity disorder, or another inflammatory disease associated with MCA. Idiopathic MCAS refers to patients who do not have
clonal mast cells and who do not have an underlying disorder but
who nonetheless fulfill the consensus criteria for MCAS with characteristic clinical symptoms and signs, specific abnormal laboratory
test results, and a response to treatment that inhibits mast cells or the
effect of mast cell mediators.
The differential diagnosis of MCAS is broad, reflecting the protean symptoms and signs that have been associated with the syndrome. Cardiovascular conditions may be considered in those with
syncope; thyroid disease, adrenal insufficiency, infectious diseases,
intoxications, chronic pain syndromes, somatization secondary to
anxiety or depression, hypereosinophilic syndromes, hereditary
angioedema, and dysautonomias are also considerations in patients
with symptoms that appear to be potentially related to MCA. There
is also an overlap with idiopathic anaphylaxis and MCAS (see Chapter 190 and Fig. 190.4).
When episodes of cutaneous flushing are the primary symptom and
sign, the differential diagnosis is likewise broad. Flushing refers to transient episodes of erythema, most commonly on the face, accompanied
by a sensation of warmth. Wet flushing is associated with increased
sweating and is typical of autonomic nervous system activation,
whereas dry flushing occurs without sweating. Wet flushing is more
likely caused by panic attacks, pain syndromes, dysautonomia, medications, or toxins. Dry flushing is associated with a more extensive list of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4128 Part XXIX u The Skin

Patient with flushing, itching, intestinal, and neurologic
symptoms following reactions to contrast media, exercise,
foods, insect stings, latex, medications, stress, and
temperature extremes

• Basal tryptase ≥20 ng/mL and/or
• Event-related tryptase increase
by 20% of baseline + 2 ng/mL

Basal serum tryptase normal or slightly elevated (11.5-20 ng/mL)*
± diagnostic increase in event-related tryptase

MCMD with elevated
tryptase
History of:
1. Anaphylaxis to Hymenoptera stings
2. Hypotensive anaphylaxis with or
without angioedema or urticaria

Skin lesions present (up)

Skin biopsy

Flow cytometry of peripheral blood cells
for CD117, CD25, CD2

Bone marrow biopsy

+

SM check for D816V KIT pathogenic variant†

–

Cutaneous mastocytosis

Serum measurements:
• lL-6, IL-31, CCL2, CXCL8
Urine measurements:
(24 hr refrigerated)
• Methyl histamine, MIA
• PGD2
• 11- Prostaglandin F2
• LCT4

MCMD
without
elevated
tryptase or MC
proliferation

MCMD with elevated tryptase and MC proliferation§

Fig. 700.13 Diagnostic algorithm for mast cell disorders. Diagrammatic representation of a proposed diagnostic rubric for mast cell mediator disor-

ders with emphasis on clonal and nonclonal subtypes and the presence or absence of elevated serum tryptase. MC, Mast cells; MCMD, mast cell mediator disorder; SM, systemic mastocytosis. *This range varies among different laboratories. †KIT pathogenic variants should be investigated. §A patient
with elevated basal tryptase should also have BM biopsy; most of these patients have SM. (From Theoharides TC, Tsilioni I, Ren H. Recent advances in
our understanding of mast cell activation – or should it be mast cell mediator disorders? Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2019;15[6]:639–656, Fig. 1.)

possible diagnoses, including MCAS, thyroid disease, foods and other
ingestions, some interferonopathies and channelopathies, and tumors
such as pheochromocytoma, neuroendocrine tumors, and medullary
carcinoma of the thyroid.
When evaluating a patient with symptoms consistent with MCA, if
the symptoms are severe, episodic, and respond to mast cell–directed
therapy, then the likelihood of MCAS is high. In this setting, further
evaluation with serum tryptase measurements should be performed.
If the patient fulfills all three diagnostic criteria for MCAS (see Table
700.4), a potential underlying cause should then be sought. This
investigation might include genetic analysis of the KIT gene in those
suspected of having clonal disease such as cutaneous or systemic mastocytosis, a search for potential allergens, or further evaluation for an
underlying chronic inflammatory disease (Fig. 700.13). The MCAS can

then be classified as primary, secondary, or idiopathic and appropriate
management initiated.
The management of MCAS includes medications that interfere with
the effects of mast cell mediators, such as the antihistamines cetirizine,
loratadine, and fexofenadine; the antileukotrienes montelukast and
zafirlukast; and medications that interfere with degranulation such as
the mast cell stabilizer cromolyn. Recently, the tyrosine kinase inhibitor midostaurin has also demonstrated efficacy by inhibiting histamine
release and increasing apoptosis of mast cells. Management of any
identified associated disease is paramount. Prognosis is favorable for
most individuals with MCAS but is also dependent on potential associated disease and comorbidities.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 701 u Diseases of Subcutaneous Tissue

Chapter 701

Diseases of Subcutaneous
Tissue
Jacquelyn R. Sink and Yvonne E. Chiu
Diseases involving the subcutis are usually characterized by necrosis
and/or inflammation; they may occur either as a primary event or
as a secondary response to various stimuli or disease processes. The
principal diagnostic criteria relate to the appearance and distribution
of the lesions, associated symptoms, results of laboratory studies, histopathology, and natural history and exogenous provocative factors of
these conditions.

CORTICOSTEROID-­INDUCED ATROPHY

Intradermal or subcutaneous injection of a corticosteroid can produce
deep atrophy accompanied by surface pigmentary changes and telangiectasia (Fig. 701.1). These changes occur approximately 2-­8 weeks after
injection and may last for months.

RAYNAUD PHENOMENON

An exaggerated vascular response to cold temperatures or emotional
stress, Raynaud phenomenon is characterized by sudden-­
onset,
sharply demarcated, transient color changes of the skin of the digits
(see Chapter 201). This condition can occur as a primary condition or
may be associated with an underlying disorder, such as systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) or systemic sclerosis. It is thought to be caused by
abnormal vasoconstriction of the digital blood vessels.

701.1 Panniculitis and Erythema Nodosum
Jacquelyn R. Sink and Yvonne E. Chiu
Inflammation of the fibrofatty subcutaneous tissue may primarily involve the fat lobule (lobular panniculitis) or the fibrous septum
that compartmentalizes the fatty lobules (septal panniculitis). Histopathologic evaluation is usually necessary to confirm the diagnosis. Lobular panniculitis that spares the subcutaneous vasculature
includes infectious panniculitis, traumatic panniculitis (including cold
and post-­steroid panniculitis), connective tissue disease panniculitis,
pancreatic panniculitis, α1 antitrypsin deficiency, subcutaneous fat
necrosis (SCFN) of the newborn, sclerema neonatorum, subcutaneous
sarcoidosis, and factitial panniculitis. Lobular panniculitis associated

4129

with vasculitis occurs in erythema induratum and occasionally as a feature of Crohn’s disease (see Chapter 382.2). Septal panniculitis, sparing the vasculature, may be seen in erythema nodosum (Table 701.1
and Fig. 701.2), necrobiosis lipoidica, progressive systemic sclerosis
(see Chapter 201), and subcutaneous granuloma annulare (see Chapter
700). Septal panniculitis that includes inflammation of the vessels is
found primarily in leukocytoclastic vasculitis and polyarteritis nodosa
(see Chapter 210).

ERYTHEMA NODOSUM
Etiology and Pathogenesis

No underlying cause is found in 30–50% of pediatric cases of erythema
nodosum; Table 701.1 lists numerous potential etiologies. The most
common etiology in children is group A β-­hemolytic streptococcal
infection. Other causes include Yersinia enterocolitica gastroenteritis,
medications (cephalosporins, penicillins, macrolides), and inflammatory disorders (inflammatory bowel disease); sarcoidosis should be
considered in young adults.

Clinical Manifestations

Erythema nodosum is a nodular erythematous hypersensitivity reaction that typically appears as multiple lesions on the lower legs (favoring the pretibial area) and less often in other areas, including the
extensor surfaces of the arms and thighs. The lesions vary in size from
1 to 6 cm and are symmetric and oval, with the longer axis parallel to
the extremity. Lesions initially appear bright or dull red but progress
to a brown or purple; they are painful and usually do not ulcerate (see
Fig. 701.2). Initial lesions may resolve in 1-­2 weeks, but new lesions
may continue to appear for 2-­6 weeks. Repeat episodes may occur over
weeks to months. Before or immediately at the onset of lesions, there
may be systemic manifestations, including fever, malaise, arthralgias
(50–90%), and rheumatoid factor–negative arthritis.

Histology

A septal panniculitis occurs acutely with thickening of the septa and an
inflammatory cell infiltrate composed of neutrophils. Monocytes and
histiocytes predominate in chronic erythema nodosum.

Treatment

Treatment is directed at the underlying cause. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents (ibuprofen, naproxen, salicylates) may be prescribed
for symptomatic relief, along with bed rest and leg elevation. Supersaturated solution of potassium iodide (oral), colchicine, and intralesional corticosteroids can be considered as alternative treatments for
persistent symptoms. Oral steroids have been employed for the treatment of severe, persistent, or recurrent lesions. The idiopathic form

Table 701.1  Etiology of Erythema Nodosum
VIRUSES
Epstein-­Barr, hepatitis B, mumps
FUNGI
Coccidioidomycosis, histoplasmosis, blastomycosis, sporotrichosis,
Trichophyton mentagrophytes
BACTERIA AND OTHER INFECTIOUS AGENTS
Group A streptococcus,* tuberculosis,* Yersinia, Shigella, Escherichia
coli, cat-­scratch disease, leprosy, leptospirosis, tularemia,
mycoplasma, Whipple disease, lymphogranuloma venereum,
psittacosis, brucellosis, meningococcosis, neisserial infection,
syphilis

Fig. 701.1 Localized fat atrophy with overlying erythema after steroid
injection.

OTHER
Sarcoidosis, inflammatory bowel disease,* estrogen-­containing oral
contraceptives,* systemic lupus erythematosus, Behçet syndrome,
severe acne, celiac disease, Hodgkin disease, lymphoma,
sulfonamides, bromides, echinacea, Sweet syndrome, pregnancy,
idiopathic*
*Common.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4130 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 701.3 Deep nodule of lupus profundus with overlying hyperkeratotic lesion of discoid lupus erythematosus.

forms of cutaneous lupus or as an isolated condition. The mean age of
onset in reported pediatric cases is 9.8 years.

Clinical Manifestations

Fig. 701.2 Tender red nodules with indistinct borders in a teenage
girl with erythema nodosum. (From Weston WL, Lane AT, Morelli J.
Color Textbook of Pediatric Dermatology, 3rd ed. St. Louis: Mosby;
2002, p. 212.)

is a self-­limited disorder. Protracted or recurrent cases may warrant
further workup, including antistreptolysin O/deoxyribonuclease ASO/
(DNase) B titer, complete blood count (CBC), throat culture, QuantiFERON-­TB gold assay but not a tuberculosis (TB) skin test, chest radiograph, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and C-­reactive protein.

POST-­STEROID PANNICULITIS
Etiology and Pathogenesis

The mechanism of the inflammatory reaction in the fat in post-­steroid
panniculitis is unknown.

Clinical Manifestations

Most cases of post-­steroid panniculitis have been reported in children.
The disorder occurs in children who have received high-­dose corticosteroids, particularly after rapid discontinuation. Within 1-­2 weeks
after discontinuation of the drug, multiple subcutaneous nodules usually appear on the cheeks, although other areas may be involved. Nodules range in size from 0.5 to 4.0 cm, are erythematous or skin-­colored,
and may be pruritic or painful.

Histology

A lobular panniculitis is seen with a mixed infiltrate of lymphocytes,
histiocytes, and neutrophils. Scattered, swollen adipocytes with eosinophilic, needle-­shaped crystals are also seen. The epidermis, dermis,
and fibrous septa of the fat are normal. Vasculitis is not seen.

Treatment

Treatment of post-­
steroid panniculitis is unnecessary because the
lesions remit spontaneously over a period of months without scarring.

LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS PROFUNDUS (LUPUS
ERYTHEMATOSUS PANNICULITIS)
Etiology and Pathogenesis

The pathophysiology of lupus erythematosus profundus is largely
unknown. This variant of chronic cutaneous lupus erythematosus is
rare in childhood. Only 2–5% of patients with lupus erythematosus
profundus have associated SLE. It can occur in association with other

Lupus erythematosus profundus manifests as one to several firm, tender, well-­defined, purple plaques or nodules 1-­3 cm in diameter. Most
pediatric cases involve the head/neck and proximal extremities. This
condition may precede or follow the development of other cutaneous
lesions and/or SLE. The overlying skin is usually normal but may be
erythematous, atrophic, poikilodermatous, ulcerated, or hyperkeratotic (Fig. 701.3). On healing, a shallow depression generally remains
or, rarely, soft pink areas of anetoderma result.

Histology

The histopathologic changes in lupus erythematosus profundus are distinctive and may allow the clinician to make the diagnosis in the absence of
other cutaneous features of lupus erythematosus. The panniculitis is characterized by a mostly nodular, dense infiltrate of lymphocytes and plasma
cells. Necrosis of the fat lobule is characteristic. A dense perivascular and
periappendiceal lymphocytic infiltrate is seen in the dermis. Lichenoid
changes may be identified at the epidermal-­dermal junction. Histopathologic differentiation from subcutaneous panniculitis–like T-­cell lymphoma may be difficult and requires T-­cell rearrangement studies.

Treatment

Nodules tend to be persistent and frequently ulcerate. Long-­term
follow-­up to evaluate for systemic disease is warranted; approximately
5–10% of patients with lupus erythematosus profundus will have SLE.
There is no consensus on the utility of laboratory testing. Antinuclear
antibody is positive in only a small subset of patients. A few case
reports show slight neutropenia, leukopenia, and mildly elevated liver
function tests. Hydroxychloroquine (2-­5 mg/kg/day) is the treatment
of choice for lupus erythematosus profundus. Systemic corticosteroids
may be helpful, but topical corticosteroids are typically ineffective.
Intralesional corticosteroids may worsen the lipoatrophy and lead to
ulceration. Immunosuppressive agents are indicated only for the treatment of other severe manifestations of SLE. Avoidance of sun exposure
and trauma is also important.

α1-­ANTITRYPSIN DEFICIENCY
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Individuals with α1-­antitrypsin deficiency have severe homozygous
deficiency (ZZ genotype) or, rarely, a partial deficiency of the protease
inhibitor α1-­antitrypsin, which inhibits trypsin activity and the activity of elastase, serine proteases, collagenase, factor VIII, and kallikrein
(see Chapter 442). Panniculitis is rare and usually occurs with severe
α1-­antitrypsin deficiency.

Clinical Manifestations

Cellulitis-­like areas or one or more warm, tender, red nodules occur
on the trunk or proximal extremities. Nodules tend to ulcerate

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 701 u Diseases of Subcutaneous Tissue

4131

spontaneously and discharge an oily yellow fluid. Panniculitis may be
associated with other manifestations of the disease, such as panacinar
emphysema, noninfectious hepatitis, cirrhosis, persistent cutaneous
vasculitis, cold contact urticaria, and acquired angioedema. Diagnosis can be substantiated by a decreased level of serum α1-­antitrypsin
activity.

Histology

Extensive septal and lobular neutrophilic infiltrate with necrosis of the
fat is observed.

Treatment

Panniculitis associated with α1-­antitrypsin deficiency typically resolves
over several weeks after treatment with intravenous exogenous enzyme
replacement therapy.

PANCREATIC PANNICULITIS
Etiology and Pathogenesis

The pathogenesis of pancreatic panniculitis appears to be multifactorial, involving liberation of the lipolytic enzymes lipase, trypsin, and
amylase into the circulation, which leads to adipocyte membrane
damage and intracellular lipolysis. There is no correlation, however,
between the occurrence of panniculitis and the serum concentration
of pancreatic enzymes.

Clinical Manifestations

Pancreatic panniculitis manifests most commonly on the pretibial
regions, thighs, or buttocks as tender, erythematous nodules that may
be fluctuant and occasionally discharge an oily brown or yellowish liquid. It appears most often in males with alcoholism but may also occur
in patients with pancreatitis because of cholelithiasis or abdominal
trauma, rupture of pancreatic pseudocysts, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, or pancreatic acinar cell carcinoma. Associated features
may include polyarthritis (pancreatitis-­panniculitis-­polyarthritis
syndrome). In almost 65% of patients, abdominal signs are absent or
mild, making the diagnosis difficult.

Histology

Characteristic histopathologic changes include lobular panniculitis
with necrosis of fat cells and ghost cells with thick, shadowy walls and
no nuclei.

Treatment

The primary pancreatic disorder must be treated. The arthritis may be
chronic and responds poorly to treatment with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and oral corticosteroids.

SUBCUTANEOUS FAT NECROSIS
Etiology and Pathogenesis

SCFN in infants may be a result of ischemic injury from various perinatal complications, such as maternal preeclampsia, birth trauma,
asphyxia, meconium aspiration, and prolonged hypothermia. Whole-­
body cooling for neonatal hypoxemic-­
ischemic encephalopathy is
increasingly associated with SCFN. Susceptibility is attributed to differences in composition between the subcutaneous tissue of young infants
and that of older infants, children, and adults. Neonatal fat solidifies at
a relatively high temperature because of its relatively greater concentration of high-­melting-­point saturated fatty acids, such as palmitic and
stearic acids.

Clinical Manifestations

This benign, self-­
limited inflammatory disorder of adipose tissue
occurs primarily in the first few days to weeks of life in apparently
healthy, full-­term or postterm infants. Some lesions may be present
at birth. Typical lesions are asymptomatic, indurated, erythematous
to violaceous, sharply demarcated plaques or nodules located primarily on the cheeks, buttocks, back, thighs, or upper arms (Fig. 701.4).
Lesions may be focal or extensive and are generally asymptomatic,
although they may be tender during the acute phase. Uncomplicated

Fig. 701.4 Red-­purple nodular infiltration of the skin of the chest
caused by subcutaneous fat necrosis.

lesions involute spontaneously within weeks to months, usually without scarring or atrophy. Calcium deposition may occasionally occur
within areas of fat necrosis, which may sometimes result in rupture
and drainage of liquid material. These areas may heal with atrophy.
A potentially serious complication of SCFN is hypercalcemia. It
typically manifests before 2 months of age, but can present up to 6
months of age, with lethargy, poor feeding, vomiting, failure to thrive,
irritability, seizures, shortening of the QT interval on electrocardiography, and/or renal failure. The origin of the hypercalcemia is
unknown, but an accepted hypothesis is that macrophages produce
1,25-­dihydroxyvitamin D3 which, in turn, increases calcium uptake.
Infants with SCFN should be monitored for several months after
lesion resolution for delayed-­onset hypercalcemia.

Histology

Histopathologic changes in SCFN are diagnostic, consisting of necrosis of fat; a granulomatous cellular infiltrate composed of lymphocytes,
histiocytes, multinucleated giant cells, and fibroblasts; and radially
arranged clefts of crystalline triglyceride within fat cells and multinucleated giant cells. Calcium deposits are commonly found in areas
of fat necrosis.

Differential Diagnosis

SCFN can be confused with sclerema neonatorum, panniculitis, cellulitis, and hematoma.

Treatment

Because the lesions are self-­limited, therapy is not required for uncomplicated cases of SCFN. Needle aspiration of fluctuant lesions may prevent rupture and subsequent scarring but is rarely needed. Treatment
of hypercalcemia is aimed at enhancing renal calcium excretion with
hydration and furosemide (1-­2 mg/kg/dose) and at limiting dietary
intake of calcium and vitamin D. Reduction of intestinal calcium
absorption and alteration of vitamin D metabolism may be accomplished by administering corticosteroids (0.5-­1.0 mg/kg/day). Bisphosphonates have been used in severe cases.

SCLEREMA NEONATORUM
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Although the cause of sclerema neonatorum remains unknown, multiple theories have been proposed. The hardening of the subcutaneous
fat may occur as a response to a decrease in body temperature because
of circulatory shock, a defect in lipolytic enzymes or in lipid transport,
association with an underlying severe disease, or a special form of
edema affecting the connective tissue supporting the adipocytes.

Clinical Manifestations

This uncommon panniculitis manifests abruptly in preterm, gravely ill
infants as diffuse, yellowish white, woody indurations of the skin. It
begins on the legs and buttocks and then quickly progresses to other
areas, sparing the palms and soles. Affected skin becomes stony in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4132 Part XXIX u The Skin
consistency, cold, and nonpitting. The face assumes a masklike expression, and joint mobility may be compromised because of inflexibility
of the skin.

may be associated with numbness, tingling, itching, burning, or pain.
Blister formation and ulceration are rare (see Chapter 90).

Histology

Histopathologic examination reveals marked dermal edema and a
perivascular and periappendiceal, predominantly T-­cell lymphocytic
infiltrate in the papillary and reticular dermis.

Histopathologic changes in sclerema neonatorum consist of increased
size of fat cells and width of the fibrous connective tissue septa. In contrast to SCFN, fat necrosis, inflammation, giant cells, and calcium crystals are generally absent.

Treatment

Sclerema neonatorum is almost always associated with serious illness,
such as sepsis, congenital heart disease, multiple congenital anomalies,
or hypothermia. The appearance of sclerema in a sick infant should be
regarded as an ominous prognostic sign. There is no specific therapy
for the condition. The outcome depends on the response of the underlying disorder to treatment.

COLD PANNICULITIS
Etiology and Pathogenesis

The pathogenic mechanism of cold panniculitis may be likened to that
of SCFN, involving a greater propensity of fat to solidify in infants than
in older children and adults because of the higher percentage of saturated fatty acids in the subcutaneous fat of infants. Lesions occur in
infants after prolonged cold exposure, especially on the cheeks, or after
prolonged application of a cold object such as an ice cube, ice bags,
cooling blankets, or popsicles to any area of the skin.

Clinical Manifestations

Ill-­defined, erythematous to bluish, painful, indurated plaques or nodules arise within hours to a few days in areas exposed to cold (face,
arms, legs); the lesions persist for 2-­3 weeks and heal without residua.

Histology

Histopathologic examination reveals an infiltrate of lymphoid and histiocytic cells around blood vessels at the dermal-­subdermal junction
and in the fat lobules; by the third day, some of the fat cells in the subcutis may have ruptured and coalesced into cystic structures.

Differential Diagnosis

Cold panniculitis may be confused with facial cellulitis caused by Haemophilus influenzae type b. As opposed to buccal cellulitis, the area may
be cold to the touch, and the patient is afebrile and appears well. Familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome manifests with urticaria on
exposure to cold environments; associated features include conjunctivitis, myalgias, fatigue, and elevated inflammatory markers. Cold urticaria, in contrast, occurs on direct contact with cold objects, resulting
in urticaria at the site, which can be reproduced with the ice cube test.

Histology

Differential Diagnosis

Raynaud phenomenon is a more acute condition than chilblains, with
characteristic color changes and no chronic lesions. Frostbite due to
extreme cold exposure is painful and involves freezing of the tissue,
with resultant tissue necrosis.

Treatment

Most cases of chilblains resolve spontaneously, but the condition can last
up to 2-­3 weeks. Prevention is the treatment of choice. Nifedipine (0.25-­
0.5 mg/kg 3 times a day, maximum 10 mg/dose) may be used in severe
cases. Unusual or persistent cases of perniosis in children may warrant
further workup, including antinuclear antibody titer, cryoglobulins,
antiphospholipid antibodies, CBC with differential, and cold agglutinins.

FACTITIAL PANNICULITIS
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Factitial panniculitis results from subcutaneous injection of a foreign
substance by the patient or a proxy. The most common substances are
organic materials such as milk and feces; drugs, such as the opiates and
pentazocine; oily materials, such as mineral oil and paraffin; and the
synthetic polymer povidone.

Clinical Manifestations

Indurated plaques, ulcers, or nodules that liquefy and drain may be
noted clinically in factitial panniculitis.

Histology

The histopathology is variable, depending on the injected substance,
but may include the presence of birefringent crystals, oil cysts surrounded by fibrosis and inflammation, and an acute inflammatory
reaction with fat necrosis. Vessels are characteristically spared.

Treatment

Treatment of factitial panniculitis must address the primary reason for
the performance of this self-­destructive act. Munchausen syndrome by
proxy should be considered in young children (see Chapter 17.2).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

701.2 Lipodystrophy

Treatment

Treatment is unnecessary because cold panniculitis resolves spontaneously. Recurrence of the lesions is common, emphasizing the importance of parental education.

CHILBLAINS (PERNIO)
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Vasospasm of arterioles from damp cold exposure with resultant
hypoxemia and localized perivascular mononuclear inflammation
appears to be responsible for chilblains (see Chapter 90). The disease is
most commonly idiopathic but may be associated with cryoglobulins,
antiphospholipid antibodies, anorexia nervosa, or a thin body habitus.
There are reports of chilblain-­like rash occurring during the COVID1­ 9 pandemic.

Clinical Manifestations

The condition is characterized by initial blanching followed by localized, symmetric, erythematous to violaceous, edematous plaques and
nodules in areas exposed to cold, typically acral sites (distal hands and
feet, ears, face). Lesions develop 12-­24 hours after cold exposure and

Leah Lalor
Lipodystrophies are conditions that share a common finding of reduction in subcutaneous fat, often with accompanying lipohypertrophy in
other areas. They may be inherited or acquired. Several lipodystrophy
syndromes have been described, which are extremely rare disorders
of deficient body fat associated with many metabolic complications.
Lipoatrophy is selective loss of fat (whereas lipodystrophy is redistribution of fat) and is associated with medications, HIV infection, trauma
or pressure, autoimmune disorders, and after inflammation of fat.
Lipodystrophies are defined by etiology (congenital or acquired)
and distribution of fat loss (generalized or partial). This results in four
main types of lipodystrophy: congenital generalized lipodystrophy,
familial partial lipodystrophy, acquired generalized lipodystrophy, and
acquired partial lipodystrophy.

GENERALIZED LIPODYSTROPHY

Generalized lipodystrophy may be congenital or acquired and is characterized by loss of fat affecting the whole body.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 701 u Diseases of Subcutaneous Tissue
Congenital generalized lipodystrophy (CGL): This is an autosomal
recessive disorder characterized by nearly complete lack of subcutaneous fat starting at birth or in infancy with prominent musculature,
phlebomegaly, acanthosis nigricans, hepatomegaly, umbilical prominence, and voracious appetite in childhood. There are several known
genetic causes, each with unique clinical features. Metabolic complications are frequent and may be severe.
Acquired generalized lipodystrophy (AGL): This typically presents
before adolescence with progressive fat loss of the whole body, including palms and soles, and is more common in females (3:1 female:male).
There may be fat accumulation in the face, neck, and/or axillae. There
are frequent and often severe metabolic complications, and this is associated with autoimmune disease.

PARTIAL LIPODYSTROPHY

Partial lipodystrophy is when part of the body has loss of fat with frequent excess fat accumulation elsewhere in the body. It may be inherited or acquired.
Familial partial lipodystrophy (FPLD): This is a group of autosomal dominant disorders in which fat loss affects the limbs, buttocks,
and hips with excess fat accumulation in other areas dependent on
particular subtype. Fat distribution is often normal in childhood with
development of progressive loss of fat around puberty. There is often
associated muscular hypertrophy and metabolic complications in
adulthood, particularly cardiac.
Acquired partial lipodystrophy (APL): As in AGL, this is more
common in females (4:1 female:male) and begins in childhood with
progressive loss of fat in a cranial-­to-­caudal distribution. Fat accumulation may appear in the hips, buttocks, and legs. Metabolic complications are uncommon, but it is associated with autoimmune diseases, in
particular, membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis.

Diagnosis

Diagnosis of lipodystrophy is based on history, physical examination,
body composition, and metabolic status, and confirmatory genetic testing may be helpful in suspected familial cases, but formal diagnostic
criteria have not been established. Lipodystrophy should be suspected
in patients with regional or generalized lack of adipose tissue outside
the normal range and in children with failure to thrive. Additional
physical features include prominent muscles and veins; severe acanthosis nigricans; eruptive xanthomas; and Cushingoid, acromegaloid,
or progeroid appearance. Familial forms can be suspected when there
is a clear familial pattern.
Differential diagnosis includes other conditions that present with
severe weight loss, including malnutrition, eating disorders, uncontrolled diabetes mellitus, thyrotoxicosis, adrenocortical deficiency,
cancer cachexia, HIV-­associated wasting, and chronic infections.

Screening for Comorbidities

Metabolic comorbidities are common in many forms of lipodystrophy,
and all patients should be screened for dyslipidemia, diabetes, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, and cardiovascular and reproductive dysfunction. Those with APL are at lower risk for metabolic issues.
Dyslipidemia: Triglycerides should be measured at least annually
and with new-­onset abdominal pain or appearance of cutaneous xanthomas. Fasting lipid panel should be measured at diagnosis and yearly
after age 10 years.
Diabetes mellitus: Screening should be formed annually following
the guidelines of the American Diabetes Association, which includes
fasting plasma glucose, oral glucose tolerance test, or glycosylated
hemoglobin.
Liver disease: Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) should be measured yearly with liver ultrasound
performed at diagnosis and then clinically as indicated based on symptoms or laboratory abnormalities. Liver biopsy should be performed as
indicated clinically.
Reproductive dysfunction: Early adrenarche, true precocious
puberty, or central hypogonadism may occur in children with generalized lipodystrophy, and oligo/amenorrhea, decreased fertility, and

4133

polycystic ovary syndrome are common in women with lipodystrophy.
Measurement of gonadal steroids and gonadotropins, and pelvis ultrasonography should be performed as clinically indicated with pubertal
staging performed annually for children.
Cardiac disease: Hypertension is common in lipodystrophy syndromes, even in children. Blood pressure should be measured at least
yearly. ECG and echocardiogram should be done yearly in CGL and
progeroid disorders and at diagnosis and as clinically indicated in
FPLD and AGL.
Kidney disease: Protenuria is common. Urine protein should be
measured yearly using 24-­hour collection or spot urine protein-­to-­
creatinine ratio. Kidney biopsy should be done as indicated clinically.
Malignancy: Lymphomas occur in AGL. Appropriate screening has
not been established but could include yearly skin and lymph node
exam. Generalized lipodystrophy has been reported as a paraneoplastic
phenomenon in pilocytic astrocytoma in some children who recovered
body fat after treatment. Some progeroid syndromes are associated
with increased malignancy risk.

Treatment of Lipodystrophy

There is no cure for lipodystrophy, and no treatment that can regrow
lost adipose tissue; however, there are some ways to prevent or improve
the associated comorbidities. Diet is the cornerstone of therapy for the
metabolic complications of lipodystrophies, and a dietician should
be consulted for children with these diagnoses. Medium-­chain triglyceride oil formulas can provide energy and reduce triglycerides in
infants. Most patients with lipodystrophy should be encouraged to be
physically active, though some should have a cardiac evaluation before
engaging in an intense exercise regimen.
Metreleptin is recombinant human methionyl leptin and is the only
approved medication for lipodystrophy. It is a first-­line treatment for
metabolic and endocrine abnormalities in generalized lipodystrophy and may be used for prevention of these complications in children. Treatment for specific metabolic complications can be reviewed
elsewhere.
Consideration should be given to referral to plastic surgeons and/or
cosmetic dermatologists for patients with distress related to their body
appearance. Mental health professionals may also be helpful.

HIV/ART-­ASSOCIATED LIPODYSTROPHY

This is the most common form of nonlocalized lipodystrophy and is linked
to protease inhibitors and nucleoside analogue reverse transcriptase
inhibitors. It may affect up to 40% of patients within 1-­2 years of antiretroviral therapy (ART) initiation. Typical manifestations include lipoatrophy
of peripheral sites (face, limbs, heel pads, buttocks), central lipohypertrophy (particularly dorsocervical, supraclavicular, breast, intraabdominal,
and visceral), and metabolic abnormalities (insulin resistance, type 2 diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, hypertension, lactic acidosis). These changes
are progressive and largely irreversible, can be disfiguring and stigmatizing, and may result in a lack of adherence to treatment.

LOCALIZED LIPOATROPHY

Localized lipoatrophy can be idiopathic or secondary to subcutaneous
medication injections, pressure, and panniculitis. Unlike generalized
or partial lipodystrophy, localized lipoatrophy involves a small part
of the body and has no accompanying metabolic derangements. Idiopathic and pressure-­induced lipoatrophy manifest as annular atrophy
at the ankles; a bandlike semicircular depression 2-­4 cm in diameter on
the thighs, abdomen, and/or upper groin; or a centrifugally spreading,
depressed, bluish plaque with an erythematous margin. Medication-­
induced lipoatrophy is most common with insulin and injected corticosteroids, though others have been reported. Insulin lipoatrophy
usually occurs approximately 6 months to 2 years after the initiation
of relatively high doses of insulin. A dimple or well-­circumscribed
depression at or surrounding the site of injection is typically seen.
Lesions may be prevented by frequent rotation of injection sites or a
switch to insulin pump.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4134 Part XXIX u The Skin

Chapter 702

Disorders of the Sweat
Glands
Kari L. Martin
Eccrine glands are found over nearly the entire skin surface and provide the primary means, through evaporation of the water in sweat, of
cooling the body. These glands, which have no anatomic relationship
to hair follicles, secrete a relatively large amount of odorless aqueous
sweat. In contrast, apocrine sweat glands are limited in distribution to
the axillae, anogenital skin, mammary glands, ceruminous glands of
the ear, Moll glands in the eyelid, and selected areas of the face and
scalp. Each apocrine gland duct enters the pilosebaceous follicle at the
level of the infundibulum and secretes a small amount of a complex,
viscous fluid that, on alteration by microorganisms, produces a distinctive body odor. Some disorders of these two types of sweat glands are
similar pathogenetically, whereas others are unique to a given gland.

ANHIDROSIS

Neuropathic anhidrosis results from a disturbance in the neural pathway from the control center in the brain to the peripheral efferent nerve
fibers that activate sweating. Disorders in this category, which are characterized by generalized anhidrosis, include congenital insensitivity
to pain with anhidrosis (CIPA), tumors of the hypothalamus, and
damage to the floor of the third ventricle. Pontine or medullary lesions
may produce anhidrosis of the ipsilateral face or neck and ipsilateral or
contralateral anhidrosis of the rest of the body. Peripheral or segmental
neuropathies, caused by leprosy, amyloidosis, diabetes mellitus, alcoholic neuritis, or syringomyelia, may be associated with anhidrosis of
the innervated skin. Various autonomic disorders are also associated
with altered eccrine sweat gland function.
At the level of the sweat gland, anticholinergics (drugs such as atropine and scopolamine) may paralyze the sweat glands. Acute intoxication with barbiturates or diazepam has produced necrosis of sweat
glands, resulting in anhidrosis with or without erythema and bullae.
Eccrine glands are largely absent throughout the skin or are present in
a localized area among patients with hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED) or localized congenital absence of sweat glands, respectively. Infiltrative or destructive disorders that may produce atrophy of
sweat glands by pressure or scarring include scleroderma, acrodermatitis chronica atrophicans, radiodermatitis, burns, Sjögren syndrome,
multiple myeloma, and lymphoma. Obstruction of sweat glands may
occur in miliaria and in a number of inflammatory and hyperkeratotic
disorders, such as the ichthyoses, psoriasis, lichen planus, pemphigus,
porokeratosis, atopic dermatitis, and seborrheic dermatitis. Occlusion
of the sweat pore may also occur with the topical agents aluminum and
zirconium salts, formaldehyde, or glutaraldehyde.
Diverse disorders that are associated with anhidrosis by unknown
mechanisms include dehydration, uremia, cirrhosis, endocrine disorders such as Addison disease, diabetes mellitus, diabetes insipidus, and
hyperthyroidism, toxic overdose with lead, arsenic, thallium, fluorine,
or morphine, and inherited conditions such as autonomic neuropathies, Fabry disease, Franceschetti-­Jadassohn syndrome, which combines features of incontinentia pigmenti and HED, CIPA, and familial
anhidrosis with neurolabyrinthitis.
Anhidrosis may be complete, but in many cases, what appears clinically to be anhidrosis is actually hypohidrosis caused by anhidrosis of
many, but not all, eccrine glands. Compensatory, localized hyperhidrosis of the remaining functional sweat glands may occur, particularly in
diabetes mellitus and miliaria. The primary complication of anhidrosis
is hyperthermia, seen primarily in anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia or

in otherwise normal preterm or full-­term neonates who have immature eccrine glands.

HYPERHIDROSIS
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Hyperhidrosis is excessive sweating beyond what is physiologically
necessary for temperature control and occurs in 3% of the population,
with about half having axillary hyperhidrosis. The numerous disorders that can be associated with increased production of eccrine sweat
may also be classified into those with neural mechanisms involving
an abnormality in the pathway from the neural regulatory centers to
the sweat gland and those that are nonneurally mediated and occur by
direct effects on the sweat glands (Table 702.1).

Clinical Manifestations

The average age at onset of hyperhidrosis is 14-­25 years. The excess
sweating may be continuous or may occur in response to emotional
stimuli. In severe cases, sweat may be seen to drip constantly from the
hands.

Treatment

Excessive sweating of the palms and soles (volar hyperhidrosis) and
axillary sweating may respond to 20% aluminum chloride in anhydrous ethanol applied under occlusion for several hours, iontophoresis, injection with botulinum toxin, therapy with oral anticholinergics
and antimuscarinic drugs (oxybutynin), or in severe, refractory cases,
cervicothoracic or lumbar sympathectomy. Reports of successful treatment of hyperhidrosis with ultrasound and microwave technology are
available, but studies are faulted with small sample size and/or lack of
controls.

MILIARIA
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Miliaria results from retention of sweat in occluded eccrine sweat
ducts. The eruption is most often induced by hot, humid weather, but it
may also be caused by high fever. Infants who are dressed too warmly
may demonstrate this eruption indoors, even during the winter.

Clinical Manifestations

In miliaria crystallina, asymptomatic, noninflammatory, pinpoint, clear
vesicles may suddenly erupt in profusion over large areas of the body
surface, leaving brawny desquamation on healing (Fig. 702.1). This
type of miliaria occurs most frequently in newborn infants because of
the relative immaturity and delayed patency of the sweat duct and the
tendency for infants to be nursed in relatively warm, humid conditions.
It may also occur in older patients with hyperpyrexia or hypernatremia.
Miliaria rubra is a less superficial eruption characterized by erythematous, minute papulovesicles that may impart a prickling sensation. The lesions are usually localized to sites of occlusion or to flexural
areas, such as the neck, groin, and axillae, where friction may have a
role in their pathogenesis. Involved skin may become macerated and
eroded. However, lesions of miliaria rubra are extrafollicular.
Repeated attacks of miliaria rubra may lead to miliaria profunda,
which is caused by rupture of the sweat duct deeper in the skin, at
the level of the dermal-­epidermal junction. Severe, extensive miliaria
rubra or miliaria profunda may result in disturbance of heat regulation.
Lesions of miliaria rubra may become infected, particularly in malnourished or debilitated infants, leading to development of periporitis
staphylogenes, which involves extension of the process from the sweat
duct into the sweat gland.

Histology

Histologically, miliaria crystallina reveals an intracorneal or subcorneal vesicle in communication with the sweat duct, whereas in miliaria
rubra, one sees focal areas of spongiosis and spongiotic vesicle formation in close proximity to sweat ducts that generally contain a keratinous plug.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 702 u Disorders of the Sweat Glands 4135
Table 702.1  Causes of Hyperhidrosis
CORTICAL
Emotional
Familial dysautonomia
Congenital ichthyosiform
erythroderma
Epidermolysis bullosa
Nail-­patella syndrome
Jadassohn-­Lewandowsky
syndrome
Pachyonychia congenita
Palmoplantar keratoderma
Stroke
HYPOTHALAMIC
Drugs
Alcohol
Antipyretics
Cocaine
Emetics
Insulin
Opiates (including
withdrawal)
Ciprofloxacin
Exercise
Infection
Defervescence
Chronic illness
Metabolic
Carcinoid syndrome
Debility
Diabetes mellitus
Hyperpituitarism
Hyperthyroidism
Hypoglycemia
Obesity
Pheochromocytoma
Porphyria
Pregnancy
Rickets
Infantile scurvy

Cardiovascular
Heart failure
Shock
Vasomotor
Cold injury
Raynaud phenomenon
Rheumatoid arthritis
Neurologic
Abscess
Familial dysautonomia
Postencephalitic
Tumor
Absence of corpus callosum
Miscellaneous
Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome
Compensatory
Lymphoma
Phenylketonuria
Vitiligo
Frey syndrome
MEDULLARY
Physiologic gustatory sweating
Encephalitis
Granulosis rubra nasi
Syringomyelia
Thoracic sympathetic trunk
injury
SPINAL
Cord transection
Syringomyelia
CHANGES IN BLOOD FLOW
Maffucci syndrome
Arteriovenous fistula
Klippel-­Trénaunay syndrome
Glomus tumor
Blue rubber-­bleb nevus
syndrome

Differential Diagnosis

The clarity of the fluid, superficiality of the vesicles, and absence of
inflammation permit differentiation of miliaria crystalline from other
blistering disorders. Miliaria rubra may be confused with or superimposed on other diaper area eruptions, including candidiasis and
folliculitis.

Treatment

All forms of miliaria respond dramatically to cooling of the patient by
regulation of environmental temperatures and by removal of excessive
clothing; administration of antipyretics is also beneficial to patients
with fever. Topical agents are usually ineffective and may exacerbate
the eruption.

BROMHIDROSIS

Bromhidrosis, characterized by excessive odor, may result from
alteration of either apocrine or eccrine sweat. Apocrine bromhidrosis
develops after puberty as a result of the formation of short-­chain fatty
acids and ammonia by the action of anaerobic diphtheroids on axillary apocrine sweat. Eccrine bromhidrosis is caused by microbiologic
degradation of stratum corneum that has become softened by excessive eccrine sweat. The soles of the feet and the intertriginous areas
are the primary affected sites. Hyperhidrosis, warm weather, obesity,
intertrigo, and diabetes mellitus are predisposing factors. Treatments
that may be helpful include cleansing with germicidal soaps, topical clindamycin or erythromycin, or topical application of aluminum
or zirconium. In addition, more invasive surgical and laser treatments have been used. Treatment of any associated hyperhidrosis is
mandatory.

Fig. 702.1 Superficial clear vesicles of miliaria crystallina.

HIDRADENITIS SUPPURATIVA
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) is a disease of the apocrine gland–
bearing areas of the skin. The pathogenesis of hidradenitis suppurativa
is controversial. It is believed that it is a primary inflammatory disorder
of the hair follicle and not solely an alteration of apocrine glands. It
is considered a part of the follicular occlusion tetrad, along with acne
conglobata, dissecting cellulitis of the scalp, and pilonidal sinus. The
natural history of the disease involves progressive dilation below the
follicular obstruction, leading to rupture of the duct, inflammation,
sinus tract formation, and destructive scarring. It has been associated
with Sjögren syndrome, inflammatory bowel disease, obesity, smoking, diabetes mellitus, and thyroid disease. It is also known to occur
in other family members and may be associated with loss-­of-­function
pathogenic variants in multiple genes in some patients (Fig. 702.2). HS
has been one manifestation of autoinflammatory syndromes, including pyoderma gangrenosum-­acne-­HS (PASH) (PSTPIP1 promoter),
pyoderma gangrenosum-­acne-­pyogenic arthritis-­HS (PAPASH)
(PSTPIP1), and psoriatic arthritis-­pyoderma gangrenosum-­acne-­HS
(PsAPASH).

Clinical Manifestations

HS is a chronic, inflammatory, suppurative disorder of the follicular
units in the axillae, anogenital area, and, occasionally, the scalp, posterior aspect of the ears, inframammary folds (female), and periumbilical area (Fig. 702.3). Onset of clinical manifestations is sometimes
preceded by pruritus or discomfort and usually occurs during puberty
or early adulthood. Solitary or multiple painful erythematous nodules, deep abscesses, and contracted scars are sharply confined to areas
of skin containing apocrine glands. When the disease is severe and
chronic, sinus tracts, ulcers, and thick, linear fibrotic bands develop.
HS tends to persist for many years, punctuated by relapses and partial
remissions. Complications include cellulitis, ulceration, and burrowing abscesses that may perforate adjacent structures, forming fistulas
to the urethra, bladder, rectum, or peritoneum. Episodic inflammatory arthritis develops in some patients. Obesity and smoking may
worsen or trigger symptoms. Patients with HS have an increased risk
of adverse cardiovascular outcomes and a long-­term risk of squamous
cell carcinoma.
The autoinflammatory associated disorders present with fever, joint
pain, cutaneous lesions (severe painful acne), and elevated inflammatory markers (ESR, CRP).

Differential Diagnosis

Early lesions of HS are often mistaken for infected epidermal cysts,
furuncles, scrofuloderma, actinomycosis, cat-­scratch disease, granuloma inguinale, or lymphogranuloma venereum. However, sharp
localization to areas of the body that bear apocrine glands should
suggest hidradenitis. When involvement is limited to the anogenital region, the condition may be difficult to distinguish from Crohn’s
disease.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4136 Part XXIX u The Skin
Treatment

Conservative management includes cessation of smoking, weight
loss, and avoidance of irritation of the affected area. Warm compresses and topical antiseptic or antibacterial soaps may also be
Hidradenitis suppurativa
Pathogenic variants (+)

Causative genes
NCSTN, PSENEN, PSEN1,
POFUT1, POGLUT1, KRT17,
KRT6A, FGFR2, GJB2

Keratinization
Follicular occlusion
Cyst formation

MEFV, NOD2, LPIN2, NLRP3,
NLRP12, PSMB8, MVK,
IL1RN, PSTPIP1, (NCSTN?)

Autoinflammation

Keratinization precedes
inflammation

Inflammation precedes
keratinization

FOX-­FORDYCE DISEASE
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Keratinization

Autoinflammation

Follicular occlusion
Cyst formation

The cause of Fox-­Fordyce disease is unknown, but it is related to blockage of apocrine sweat glands.

AIKD

Clinical Manifestations

(in the narrow sense)

AIKD
(in the broad sense)

Fig. 702.2 Hidradenitis suppurativa and autoinflammatory keratiniza-

tion disease (AIKD). Genes responsible for hidradenitis suppurativa can
be divided into two groups. One includes NCSTN, PSENEN, PSEN1,
POFUT1, POGLUT1, KRT17, KRT6A, FGFR2, and GJB2, whose pathogenic variants result in autoinflammation preceded by keratinization.
This hidradenitis suppurativa subtype can be regarded as an autoinflammatory keratinization disease in the broad sense. The other group
includes MEFV, NOD2, LPIN2, NLRP3, NLRP12, PSMB8, MVK, IL1RN,
PSTPIP1, and possibly NCSTN, whose pathogenic variants lead to
keratinization preceded by autoinflammation. This hidradenitis suppurativa subtype can be regarded as an autoinflammatory keratinization
disease in the narrow sense. (From Nomura T. Hidradenitis suppurativa
as a potential subtype of autoinflammatory keratinization disease. Front
Immunol. 2020;11:847, Fig. 1.).

A

helpful. For mild, early disease, topical clindamycin 1% may be
helpful. For more severe disease, therapy may be initiated with doxycycline (100 mg bid) or minocycline (100 mg bid) in adolescents
and young adults. Some patients require intermittent or long-­term
antibiotic treatment. Combination therapy with clindamycin and
rifampin is helpful in some patients. Oral retinoids for 5-­6 months
may also be effective, although disease may recur. Oral contraceptive agents, which contain a high estrogen:progesterone ratio and
low androgenicity of the progesterone, are another alternative along
with spironolactone. Laser hair ablation has proven helpful in some
studies as well. Systemic immunosuppressants (infliximab, adalimumab, cyclosporine, anakinra) and medications targeted at glucose
metabolism and metabolic syndrome (metformin) have been helpful in patients resistant to more traditional measures. Adalimumab,
a tumor necrosis factor-­alpha (TNF-­α) inhibitor, is the only FDA-­
approved medication for the treatment of moderate-­to-­severe HS.
Surgical measures, including deroofing procedures and full excision, may be a helpful adjuvant to medical therapy, especially in
recalcitrant cases.

This disease is most common in females and manifests during puberty
to the third decade of life as pruritus primarily in the axillae, although
the areolae, pubic, and perineal regions can also be affected. Pruritus
is exacerbated by emotional stress and stimuli that induce apocrine
sweating. Dome-­shaped, skin-­colored to slightly hyperpigmented, follicular papules develop in the pruritic areas.

Treatment

Fox-­Fordyce disease is difficult to treat. Oral contraceptive pills
and topical treatments, including corticosteroids, antibiotics, or
retinoids, may help some patients. Systemic isotretinoin and ablative lasers have shown varying efficacy. Mechanical destruction and
removal of apocrine glands have been used in recalcitrant cases.
Partial response has been seen in one study using botulinum toxin
type A.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

B

Fig. 702.3 Hidradenitis suppurativa. A, This young man had recurrent inflammatory papules and nodulocystic lesions in the axillae and groin for 5

years. Although lesions initially improved with oral antibiotics, he subsequently developed draining sinus tracts. B, This young woman had multiple
indurated sinus tracts, nodules, and ulcers with purulent and necrotic drainage in her axillae. (From Rachidi S, Bender AM, Cohen BA. Disorders of
the hail and nails. In: Cohen BA, ed. Pediatric Dermatology, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022, Fig. 8.42.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 703 u Disorders of Hair 4137

Chapter 703

Disorders of Hair
Kari L. Martin

Acquired localized hair loss is the most common type of hair loss in
childhood. Three conditions—traumatic alopecia, alopecia areata, and
tinea capitis—are predominantly seen (Tables 703.4 and 703.5).

TRAUMATIC ALOPECIA (TRACTION ALOPECIA,
HAIR PULLING, TRICHOTILLOMANIA)
Traction Alopecia

Disorders of hair in infants and children may be a result of intrinsic
disturbances of hair growth, underlying biochemical or metabolic
defects, inflammatory dermatoses, or structural anomalies of the hair
shaft. Excessive and abnormal hair growth is referred to as hypertrichosis or hirsutism. Hypertrichosis is excessive hair growth at inappropriate locations; hirsutism is an androgen-­dependent male pattern
of hair growth in women (see Chapter 589). Hypotrichosis is deficient
hair growth. Hair loss, partial or complete, is called alopecia. Alopecia
may be classified as nonscarring or scarring; the latter type is rare in
children and, if present, is most often caused by prolonged or untreated
inflammatory conditions such as pyoderma and tinea capitis.

Traction alopecia is common and is seen in almost 20% of school-­aged
females with coily or kinky hair. It is caused by trauma to the hair follicles from tight braids or ponytails, headbands, rubber bands, curlers,
weaves, or rollers (Fig. 703.1). There is a greater risk of traction alopecia if hair trauma is combined with chemically relaxed hair. Broken
hairs and inflammatory follicular papules in circumscribed patches
at the scalp margins are characteristic and may be accompanied by
regional lymphadenopathy. Children and parents must be encouraged
to avoid devices that cause trauma to the hair and, if necessary, to alter
the hairstyle. Otherwise scarring of hair follicles may occur. Treatment
with topical phenylephrine, an α1-­adrenergic receptor agonist, facilitates contraction of arrector pili smooth muscle and shows promise in
decreasing hair loss and increasing the force needed for epilation.

HYPERTRICHOSIS

Hair Pulling

Hypertrichosis is rare in children and may be localized or generalized
and permanent or transient. Tables 703.1 and 703.2 list some of the
many causes of hypertrichosis.

HYPOTRICHOSIS AND ALOPECIA

Table 703.3 lists some of the disorders associated with hypotrichosis
and alopecia. True alopecia is rarely congenital; it is more often related
to an inflammatory dermatosis, mechanical factors, drug ingestion,
infection, endocrinopathy, nutritional disturbance, or disturbance of
the hair cycle. Any inflammatory condition of the scalp, such as atopic
dermatitis or seborrheic dermatitis, if severe enough, may result in partial alopecia. Unless the hair follicle has been permanently damaged,
hair growth returns to normal if the underlying condition is treated
successfully.
Hair loss in childhood should be divided into the following four categories: congenital diffuse, congenital localized, acquired diffuse, and
acquired localized.

Table 703.1  Causes of Hypertrichosis and Associated
Conditions
INTRINSIC FACTORS
Racial and familial forms such as hairy ears, hairy elbows,
intraphalangeal hair, or generalized hirsutism
EXTRINSIC FACTORS
Local trauma
Malnutrition
Anorexia nervosa
Long-­standing inflammatory dermatoses
Drugs: Diazoxide, phenytoin, corticosteroids, Cortisporin,
cyclosporine, androgens, anabolic agents, hexachlorobenzene,
minoxidil, psoralens, penicillamine, streptomycin, danazol,
omeprazole, valproic acid
HAMARTOMAS OR NEVI
Congenital pigmented nevocytic nevus, hair follicle nevus, Becker
nevus, congenital smooth muscle hamartoma, fawn-­tail nevus
associated with diastematomyelia
ENDOCRINE DISORDERS
Virilizing ovarian tumors, Cushing syndrome, acromegaly,
hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism, congenital adrenal
hyperplasia, adrenal tumors, gonadal dysgenesis, male
pseudohermaphroditism, nonendocrine hormone–secreting
tumors, polycystic ovary syndrome, pigmentary hypertrichosis with
non-­autoimmune diabetes mellitus (SLC29A3)
CONGENITAL AND GENETIC DISORDERS (SEE TABLE 703.2)

Hair pulling in childhood is usually an acute reactional process related
to emotional stress, or it may be a habit (especially in young children). It may also be seen in trichotillomania (obsessive-­compulsive
disorder) and as part of more severe psychiatric disorders, usually in
adolescents.
Table 703.2  Congenital Syndromes Associated with
Generalized Hypertrichosis
Acromegaloid facial appearance syndrome (affected genes: PGM1,
GLO1, IGHG3, HP)
Barber-­Say syndrome (KMT2A)
Cantú syndrome (hypertrichosis with osteochondrodysplasia)
(ABCC9, KCNJ8)
Coffin-­Siris syndrome (BAF complex genes)
Cornelia de Lange (Brachmann-­de Lange) syndrome (NIPBL, SMC1A,
SMC3, RAD21, HDAC8)
Craniofacial dysostosis
Eye disorders
• With amaurosis congenital, cone-­rod type
• With congenital lamellar cataracts and mental retardation
• With pigmentary retinopathy
Gorlin-­Chaudhry-­Moss (oculo-­facio-­cardio-­dental) syndrome (BCOR)
Gingival hyperplasia
• Congenital generalized hypertrichosis with gingival hyperplasia
• Zimmerman-­Laband syndrome
Hemimaxillofacial dysplasia
Lipodystrophies
• Berardinelli-­Seip syndrome (BSCL)
• Donohue syndrome (leprechaunism) (INSR)
Mitochondrial encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and strokelike
episodes (MELAS) syndrome
Mucopolysaccharidoses
• Hunter syndrome
• Hurler syndrome
• Sanfilippo syndrome
Porphyrias
• Erythropoietic porphyria (Gunther disease)
• Familial porphyria cutanea tarda
• Hepatoerythropoietic porphyria
Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome (CREBBP, EP300)
Schinzel-­Giedion syndrome (SETBP1 [MAJ359])
Stiff skin syndrome
Toxin exposure
• Fetal alcohol syndrome
• Fetal hydantoin syndrome
Weidemann-­Steiner syndrome (KMT2A)
Winchester (Torg-­Winchester) syndrome (MMP2)
From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022, Box 7.8, p. 191.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4138 Part XXIX u The Skin
Trichotillomania

Etiology and Pathogenesis. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual

of Mental Disorders, 5th edition (DSM-­5) classifies trichotillomania in
the category of obsessive-­compulsive and related disorders. The diagnostic criteria for trichotillomania include visible hair loss attributable
to pulling; mounting tension preceding or during hair pulling; gratification or release of tension after hair pulling; and absence of hair pulling attributable to hallucinations, delusions, or an inflammatory skin
condition.
Clinical Manifestations. Compulsive pulling, twisting, and breaking of hair produces irregular areas of incomplete hair loss, most
often on the crown and in the occipital and parietal areas of the scalp.
Occasionally eyebrows, eyelashes, and body hair are traumatized.
Trichotillomania often begins during periods of inactivity (going
to bed, watching TV) and is frequently unobserved by the parents.
Some plaques of alopecia may have a linear outline. The hairs remaining within the areas of loss are of various lengths (Fig. 703.2) and are
typically blunt-­tipped because of breakage. The scalp usually appears
normal, although hemorrhage, crusting (Fig. 703.3), and chronic folliculitis may also occur. Long-­term repeated trauma may result in
Table 703.3  Disorders Associated with Alopecia and
Hypotrichosis
Congenital total alopecia: Atrichia with papules, Moynahan alopecia
syndrome
Congenital localized alopecia: Aplasia cutis, triangular alopecia,
sebaceous nevus
Hereditary hypotrichosis: Marie-­Unna syndrome, hypotrichosis with
juvenile macular dystrophy, hypotrichosis (Mari type), ichthyosis
with hypotrichosis, cartilage-­hair hypoplasia, Hallermann-­Streiff
syndrome, trichorhinophalangeal syndrome, ectodermal dysplasia,
“pure” hair and nail and other ectodermal dysplasias
Diffuse alopecia of endocrine origin: Hypopituitarism,
hypothyroidism, hypoparathyroidism, hyperthyroidism
Alopecia of nutritional origin: Marasmus, kwashiorkor, iron
deficiency, zinc deficiency (acrodermatitis enteropathica), gluten-­
sensitive enteropathy, essential fatty acid deficiency, biotinidase
deficiency
Disturbances of the hair cycle: Telogen effluvium
Toxic alopecia: Anagen effluvium
Autoimmune alopecia: Alopecia areata
Traumatic alopecia: Traction alopecia, trichotillomania
Cicatricial alopecia: Lupus erythematosus, lichen planopilaris,
pseudopelade, morphea (en coup de sabre) dermatomyositis,
infection (kerion, favus, tuberculosis, syphilis, folliculitis,
leishmaniasis, herpes zoster, varicella), acne keloidalis, follicular
mucinosis, sarcoidosis
Hair shaft abnormalities: Monilethrix, pili annulati, pili torti,
trichorrhexis invaginata, trichorrhexis nodosa, woolly hair
syndrome, Menkes disease, trichothiodystrophy, trichodento-­
osseous syndrome, uncombable hair syndrome (spun-­glass hair, pili
trianguli et canaliculi)

irreversible damage and permanent alopecia. Trichophagy, resulting in
trichobezoars, may complicate this disorder.
Differential Diagnosis. Acute reactional hair pulling, tinea capitis,
and alopecia areata must be considered in the differential diagnosis of
trichotillomania (see Tables 703.4 and 703.5).
Treatment. Trichotillomania is closely related to obsessive-­
compulsive disorder and may be an expression of it for some children.
When trichotillomania occurs secondary to obsessive-­
compulsive
disorder, clomipramine 50-­150 mg/day or a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) such as fluoxetine may be helpful, particularly
when combined with behavioral interventions (see Chapter 37). N-­
Acetylcysteine may also be helpful.

ALOPECIA AREATA
Etiology and Pathogenesis

Alopecia areata is a T-­cell–driven autoimmune disorder producing
nonscarring alopecia. The cause is unknown. It is hypothesized that
in genetically susceptible individuals, loss of immune privilege of the
hair follicle allows for T-­cell inflammation against anagen hairs and
follicles, leading to stoppage of hair growth.

Clinical Manifestations

Alopecia areata is characterized by rapid and complete loss of hair in
round or oval patches on the scalp (Fig. 703.4), eyebrows, eyelashes,
and on other body sites. In alopecia totalis, all the scalp hair is lost (Fig.
703.5); alopecia universalis involves all body and scalp hair. The lifetime incidence of alopecia areata is 0.1–0.2% of the population. More
than half of affected patients are younger than 20 years of age.
The skin within the plaques of hair loss appears normal. Alopecia
areata is associated with atopy and with nail changes such as pits (Fig.
703.6), longitudinal striations, and leukonychia. Autoimmune diseases
such as Hashimoto thyroiditis, Addison disease, pernicious anemia,
ulcerative colitis, myasthenia gravis, collagen vascular diseases, and
vitiligo may also be seen. An increased incidence of alopecia areata has
been reported in patients with Down syndrome (5–10%).

Differential Diagnosis

Tinea capitis, seborrheic dermatitis, trichotillomania, traumatic alopecia, and lupus erythematosus should be considered in the differential
diagnosis of alopecia areata (see Tables 703.4 and 703.5).

Treatment

The course is unpredictable, but spontaneous resolution in 6-­
12
months is usual, particularly when relatively small, stable patches of
alopecia are present. Recurrences are common. Onset at a young age,
extensive or prolonged hair loss, and numerous episodes are usually
poor prognostic signs. Alopecia universalis, alopecia totalis, and alopecia ophiasis (Fig. 703.7)—a type of alopecia areata in which hair loss
is circumferential—are also less likely to resolve. Therapy is difficult
to evaluate because the course is erratic and unpredictable. The use
of highly potent or superpotent topical corticosteroids is effective in

Table 703.4  Helpful Historical Clues in the Diagnosis of Hair Disorders
HISTORICAL CONSIDERATIONS

TELOGEN EFFLUVIUM

TRICHOTILLOMANIA

TINEA CAPITIS

ALOPECIA AREATA

Are the spots itchy?

Negative

Negative

Positive

Usually negative

Do the spots come and
go?

Negative

Sometimes positive

Negative

Sometimes positive

Is the hair falling out in
clumps?

Positive

Negative

Negative

Usually negative

Are there any anxiety
disorders or obsessive-­
compulsive tendencies?

Negative

Positive

Negative

Negative

From Lio PA. What’s missing from this picture? An approach to alopecia in children. Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed. 2007;92:193–198.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 703 u Disorders of Hair 4139
Table 703.5  Helpful Physical Examination Clues in the Diagnosis of Hair Disorders
PHYSICAL FINDINGS

TELOGEN EFFLUVIUM

TRICHOTILLOMANIA

TINEA CAPITIS

ALOPECIA AREATA

Scarring?

Negative

Negative

Usually negative

Negative

Exclamation-­point hairs?

Negative

Negative

Negative

Positive

Irregular pattern with
mixed length and stubbly
hairs?

Negative

Positive

Negative

Negative

Scaling, pustules, or
kerion?

Negative

Negative

Positive

Negative

Positive hair-­pull test
result?

Positive

Negative

Negative

Usually negative

Nail pitting or grooves?

Negative

Negative

Negative

Positive

From Lio PA. What’s missing from this picture? An approach to alopecia in children. Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed. 2007;92:193–198.

Fig. 703.1 Traction alopecia.

Fig. 703.4 Circular patch of alopecia areata with normal-­appearing
scalp.

Fig. 703.2 Hair pulling. Hairs are broken off at various lengths.

Fig. 703.3 Hemorrhage and crusting secondary to hair pulling.

Fig. 703.5 Alopecia totalis: total loss of scalp hair.

Fig. 703.6 Multiple nail pits in alopecia areata.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4140 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 703.6  Possible Etiology of Anagen Effluvin
CANCER THERAPY
Chemotherapy
Radiation therapy
TOXIC METAL (SEE CHAPTER 760)
Lead (see Chapter 761)
Mercury
Arsenic (rat, insect poison)
Thallium (rat poison)
Bismuth

Fig. 703.7 Ophiasis pattern of alopecia areata.
some patients. Intradermal injections of steroid (triamcinolone 5 mg/
mL) every 4-­6 weeks may also stimulate hair growth locally, but this
mode of treatment is impractical in young children or in patients with
extensive hair loss. Systemic corticosteroid therapy (prednisone 1 mg/
kg/day) is associated with good results; the permanence of cure is questionable, however, and the side effects of chronic oral corticosteroids
are a serious deterrent. Some patients may maintain hair growth by
switching to a more appropriate long-­term immunosuppressant such
as methotrexate. Additional therapies that are sometimes effective
include short-­contact anthralin, topical minoxidil, and contact sensitization with squaric acid dibutylester or diphenylcyclopropenone. Janus
kinase inhibitors, both oral and topical, may also be used. In general,
parents and patients can be reassured that spontaneous remission of
alopecia areata usually occurs. New hair growth may initially be of
finer caliber and lighter color, but replacement by normal terminal hair
can be expected.

ACQUIRED DIFFUSE HAIR LOSS
Telogen Effluvium

Telogen effluvium manifests as sudden loss of large amounts of hair,
often with brushing, combing, and washing of hair. Diffuse loss of scalp
hair occurs from premature conversion of growing, or anagen, hairs,
which normally constitute 80–90% of hairs, to resting, or telogen, hairs.
Hair loss is noted 6 weeks to 3 months after the precipitating cause,
which may include childbirth; a febrile episode; surgery; acute blood
loss, including blood donation; sudden severe weight loss; discontinuation of high-­dose corticosteroids or oral contraceptives; hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism; and psychiatric stress. Telogen effluvium also
accounts for the loss of hair by infants in the first few months of life;
friction from bed sheets, particularly in infants with pruritic, atopic
skin, may exacerbate the problem. There is no inflammatory reaction;
the hair follicles remain intact, and telogen bulbs can be demonstrated
microscopically on shed hairs. Because >50% of the scalp hair is rarely
involved, alopecia is usually not severe. Parents should be reassured
that normal hair growth will return within approximately 3-­6 months.

Toxic Alopecia (Anagen Effluvium)

Anagen effluvium is an acute, severe, diffuse inhibition of growth of
anagen follicles, resulting in the loss of >80–90% of scalp hair. Hairs
become dystrophic, and the hair shaft breaks at the narrowed segment.
Loss is diffuse, rapid (1-­3 weeks after treatment), and temporary, as
regrowth occurs after the offending agent is discontinued. Causes of
anagen effluvium include radiation; cancer chemotherapeutic agents
such as antimetabolites, alkylating agents, and mitotic inhibitors; thallium; thiouracil; heparin; the coumarins; boric acid; and hypervitaminosis A (see Table 703.6).

CONGENITAL DIFFUSE HAIR LOSS

Congenital diffuse hair loss is defined as congenitally thin hair diffusely
related to either hypoplasia of hair follicles or to structural defects in
hair shafts.

TOXIC CHEMICALS
Boric acid (pesticide, cleaning agent)
Warfarin
Colchicine

Structural Defects of Hair

Structural defects of the hair shaft may be congenital, reflect known
biochemical aberrations, or be related to damaging grooming practices. All the defects can be demonstrated by microscopic examination
of affected hairs, particularly with scanning and transmission electron
microscopy, although many can even be seen by simple trichography
done in the office.

Trichorrhexis Nodosa

Congenital trichorrhexis nodosa is an autosomal dominant condition. The hair is dry, brittle, and lusterless, with irregularly spaced,
grayish white nodes on the hair shaft. Microscopically, the nodes
have the appearance of two interlocking brushes (Fig. 703.8A). The
defect results from a fracture of the hair shaft at the nodal points
caused by disruption of the cells in the hair cortex. Trichorrhexis
nodosa has also been observed in some infants with Menkes syndrome, trichothiodystrophy, citrullinemia, and argininosuccinic
aciduria.

Acquired Trichorrhexis Nodosa

Acquired trichorrhexis nodosa, the most common cause of hair
breakage, occurs in two forms. Proximal defects are found most frequently in children with coily or kinky hair, whose complaint is not of
alopecia but of failure of the hair to grow. The hair is short, and longitudinal splits, knots, and whitish nodules can be demonstrated in hair
mounts. Easy breakage is demonstrated by gentle traction on the hair
shafts. A history of other affected family members may be obtained.
The problem may be caused by a combination of genetic predisposition and the cumulative mechanical trauma of rough combing and
brushing, hair-­straightening procedures, and “permanents.” Patients
must be cautioned to avoid damaging grooming techniques. A soft,
natural-­bristle brush and a wide-­toothed comb should be used. The
condition is self-­limited, with resolution in 2-­4 years, if patients
avoid damaging practices. Distal trichorrhexis nodosa is seen more
frequently in children with loose curly or straight hair types. The
distal portion of the hair shaft is thinned, ragged, and faded; white
specks, sometimes mistaken for nits, may be noted along the shaft.
Hair mounts reveal the paintbrush defect and the sites of excessive
fragility and breakage. Localized areas of the moustache or beard may
also be affected. Avoidance of traumatic grooming, regular trimming
of affected ends, and the use of cream rinses to lessen tangling ameliorate this condition.

Pili Torti

Patients with pili torti present with spangled, brittle, coarse hair of
different lengths over the entire scalp. There is a structural defect in
which the hair shaft is grooved and flattened at irregular intervals
and is twisted on its axis to various degrees. Minor twists that occur
in normal hair should not be misconstrued as pili torti. Curvature of
the hair follicle apparently leads to the flattening and rotation of the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 703 u Disorders of Hair 4141

A

B

C

Fig. 703.8 A, Microscopic hair fracture in trichorrhexis nodosa. B, Beading of hair in monilethrix. C, Cuplike abnormality of hair in Netherton
syndrome.

hair shaft. The genetic defect in isolated pili torti is unknown, and
both autosomal dominant and recessive forms have been described.
Syndromes in which the hair shaft abnormalities of pili torti are
seen in association with other cutaneous and systemic abnormalities include Menkes kinky hair syndrome, Björnstad syndrome (pili
torti with deafness; BCS1L gene), and multiple ectodermal dysplasia
syndromes.

Menkes Kinky Hair Syndrome (Trichopoliodystrophy)

Males with Menkes kinky hair syndrome, an X-­linked recessive trait,
are born to an unaffected mother after a normal pregnancy. Neonatal
problems include hypothermia, hypotonia, poor feeding, seizures, and
failure to thrive. Hair is normal to sparse at birth but is replaced by
short, fine, brittle, light-­colored hair that may have features of trichorrhexis nodosa, pili torti, or monilethrix. The skin is hypopigmented and
thin, cheeks typically appear plump, and the nasal bridge is depressed.
Progressive psychomotor retardation is noted in early infancy. Pathogenic variants in the ATP7A gene, encoding a copper-­transporting adenosine triphosphatase protein, cause Menkes kinky hair syndrome. It
is a result of maldistribution of the copper in the body. Copper uptake
across the brush border of the small intestine is increased, but copper
transport from these cells into the plasma is defective, resulting in low
total body copper stores. Parenteral administration of copper-­histidine
is helpful if begun in the first 2 months of life.

Monilethrix

The hair shaft defect known as monilethrix is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait with variable age of onset, severity, and course.
Pathogenic variants in the hair keratins KRT81 (hHb1), KRT83
(hHb3), and KRT86 (hHb6) have been identified in autosomal dominant cases, and pathogenic variants in desmoglein 4 are found in
autosomal recessive cases. The hair appears dry, lusterless, and brittle,
and it fractures spontaneously or with mild trauma. Eyebrows, lashes,
body and pubic hair, and scalp hair may be affected. Monilethrix
may be present at birth, but the hair is usually normal at birth and is
replaced in the first few months of life by abnormal hairs; the condition is sometimes first apparent in childhood. Follicular papules may
appear on the nape of the neck and the occiput and, occasionally,
over the entire scalp. Short, fragile beaded hairs that emerge from
the horny follicular plugs give a distinctive appearance. Keratosis
pilaris and koilonychia of fingernails and toenails may also be present. Microscopically, a distinctive, regular beading pattern of the hair
shaft is evident, characterized by elliptic nodes that are separated by
narrower internodes (see Fig. 703.8B). Not all hairs have nodes, and
both normal and beaded hairs may break. Patients should be advised
to handle the hair gently to minimize breakage. Treatment is generally ineffective, although oral retinoids and topical minoxidil have
produced some improvement.

Trichothiodystrophy

Hair in trichothiodystrophy is sparse, short, brittle, and uneven; the
scalp hair, eyebrows, or eyelashes may be affected. Microscopically, the
hair is flattened, folded, and variable in diameter; it has longitudinal

grooving and nodal swellings that resemble those seen in trichorrhexis
nodosa. Under a polarizing microscope, distinctive alternating dark
and light bands are seen. The abnormal hair has a cystine content that
is <50% of normal because of a major reduction in and altered composition of constituent high-­sulfur matrix proteins. Trichothiodystrophy
is caused by pathogenic variants in DNA repair/transcription genes
(XPD, XPB, TTDN1, and TTDA) and may occur as an isolated finding or in association with various syndrome complexes that include
intellectual impairment, short stature, ichthyosis, nail dystrophy, dental caries, cataracts, decreased fertility, neurologic abnormalities, bony
abnormalities, and immunodeficiency. Some patients are photosensitive and have impaired DNA repair mechanisms, similar to that seen
in groups B and D xeroderma pigmentosum; the incidence of skin cancers, however, is not increased. Patients with trichothiodystrophy tend
to resemble one another, with a receding chin, protruding ears, raspy
voice, and sociable, outgoing personality. Trichoschisis, a fracture perpendicular to the hair shaft, is characteristic of the many syndromes
that are associated with trichothiodystrophy. Perpendicular breakage
of the hair shaft has also been described in association with other hair
abnormalities, particularly monilethrix.

Trichorrhexis Invaginata (Bamboo Hair)

Short, sparse, fragile hair without apparent growth is characteristic of
trichorrhexis invaginata, which is found primarily in association with
Netherton syndrome (see Chapter 699). It has also been reported in
other ichthyosiform dermatoses. The distal portion of the hair is invaginated into the cuplike proximal portion, forming a fragile nodal swelling (see Fig. 703.8C).

Pili Annulati

Alternating light and dark bands of the hair shaft characterize pili
annulati. When viewed under the light microscope, the region of the
hair shaft that appeared bright in reflected light instead appears dark
in the transmitted light as a result of focal aggregates of abnormal air-­
filled cavities within the shaft. The hair is not fragile. The defect may
be autosomal dominant or sporadic in inheritance and usually begins
after age 2. Pseudopili annulati is a variant of normal blond hair; an
optical effect caused by the refraction and reflection of light from the
partially twisted and flattened shaft creates the impression of banding.

Woolly Hair Disease

Woolly hair diseases manifest at birth as peculiarly tight, curly, abnormal hair in a person who is not Black. Autosomal dominant and
recessive (PKRY5 gene) types have been described along with the genodermatoses Naxos disease and Carvajal syndrome, which are associated with cardiomyopathy. Woolly hair nevus, a sporadic form, involves
only a circumscribed portion of the scalp hair. The affected hair is fine,
tightly curled, and light-­colored, and it grows poorly. Microscopically,
an affected hair is oval and shows twisting of 180 degrees on its axis.

Uncombable Hair Syndrome (Spun-­Glass Hair)

The hair of patients with uncombable hair syndrome appears disorderly, is often silvery blond (Fig. 703.9), and may break because of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4142 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 704.1  White Nail or Nail Bed Changes

Fig. 703.9 Complicated combing. Blond, frizzy, and glistening hair in
uncombable hair syndrome. (From Drivenes JL, Betz RC, Bygum A. A
girl with unruly locks: molecular genetics makes a diagnosis of uncombable hair syndrome. Lancet. 2022;399:1079.)

repeated, futile efforts to control it. Eyebrows and eyelashes are normal.
A longitudinal depression along the hair shaft is a constant feature, and
most hair follicles and shafts are triangular (pili trianguli et canaliculi).
The shape of the hair varies along its length, however, preventing the
hairs from lying flat.
The disorder is associated with pathogenic variants in PAD13,
TCHH, and TGM3 genes. Most patients have no other findings, but
in some there may be associated brachydactyly, ectodermal dysplasia,
cataracts, and oligodontia.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

DISEASE

CLINICAL APPEARANCE

Anemia

Diffuse white

Arsenic

Mees lines: transverse white lines

Cirrhosis

Terry nails: most of nail, zone
of pink at distal end (see Fig.
704.6)

Congenital leukonychia
(autosomal dominant; variety of
patterns)

Syndrome of leukonychia,
knuckle pads, deafness;
isolated finding; partial white

Darier disease

Longitudinal white streaks

Half-­and-­half nail

Proximal white, distal pink
azotemia

High fevers (some diseases)

Transverse white lines

Hypoalbuminemia

Muehrcke lines: stationary paired
transverse bands

Hypocalcemia

Variable white

Malnutrition

Diffuse white

Pellagra

Diffuse milky white

Punctate leukonychia

Common white spots

Tinea and yeast

Variable patterns

Thallium toxicity (rat poison)

Variable white

Trauma

Repeated manicure: transverse
striations

Zinc deficiency

Diffuse white

From Habif TP, ed. Clinical Dermatology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2004:887.

Table 704.2  Congenital Diseases with Nail Defects

Chapter 704

Large nails

Pachyonychia congenita, Rubinstein-­Taybi
syndrome, hemihypertrophy

Disorders of the Nails

Smallness or absence
of nails

Ectodermal dysplasias, nail-­patella,
dyskeratosis congenita, focal dermal
hypoplasia, cartilage-­hair hypoplasia,
COIF, Ellis–van Creveld, Larsen,
epidermolysis bullosa, incontinentia
pigmenti, Rothmund-­Thomson,
Turner, Coffin-­Siris, popliteal web,
trisomies (8, 13, 18), Apert, Gorlin-­
Pindborg, long arm 21 deletion,
otopalatodigital, elfin facies, anonychia,
Noonan, acrodermatitis enteropathica,
teratogens (alcohol, warfarin, hydantoin)

Other

Congenital malalignment of the great
toenails, familial dystrophic shedding of
the nails

Kari L. Martin
Nail abnormalities in children may be manifestations of generalized
skin disease, skin disease localized to the periungual region, systemic
disease, drugs, trauma, or localized bacterial and fungal infections
(Table 704.1). Nail anomalies are also common in certain congenital
disorders (Table 704.2).

ABNORMALITIES IN NAIL SHAPE OR SIZE

Anonychia is absence of the nail plate, usually a result of a congenital
disorder or trauma. It may be an isolated finding or may be associated
with malformations of the digits. Koilonychia is flattening and concavity of the nail plate with loss of normal contour, producing a spoon-­
shaped nail (Fig. 704.1). Koilonychia occurs as an autosomal dominant
trait or in association with iron-­deficiency anemia, Plummer-­Vinson
syndrome, hemochromatosis, various genodermatoses, and occupational trauma. The nail plate is relatively thin for the first year or two
of life and, consequently, may be spoon-­shaped in otherwise normal
children.
Congenital nail dysplasia, an autosomal dominant disorder, manifests at birth as longitudinal streaks and thinning of the nail plate.
There is platyonychia and koilonychia, which may overgrow the lateral
folds and involve all nails of the toes and fingers.

COIF, Congenital onychodysplasia of index fingers.

Nail-­patella syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder in which
the nails are 30–50% of their normal size and often have triangular or
pyramidal lunulae. The thumbnails are always involved, although in
some cases only the ulnar half of the nail may be affected or may be
missing. Nail involvement is symmetric, and the nails from the index
finger to the little finger are progressively less damaged. The patella is
also smaller than usual or absent, and this anomaly may lead to knee
instability. Iliac horns, bony spines arising from the posterior aspect of
the iliac bones; overextension of joints; skin laxity; ocular anomalies;

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 704 u Disorders of the Nails

4143

Table 704.3  Clubbing in Children*
HISTORY

SYMPTOM

DISEASE

ACQUIRED
Generalized

Pulmonary

Cystic fibrosis
Bronchiectasis
Tuberculosis, aspergillosis
Asthma complicated by lung
infections
Sarcoidosis
Pulmonary fibrosis
Tumors

Cardiovascular

Cyanotic congenital heart
disease
Subacute bacterial
endocarditis
Myxomas

Gastrointestinal

Inflammatory bowel disease
Gardner’s syndrome
Parasitosis
Cirrhosis
Chronic active hepatitis

Endocrine

Diamond’s syndrome
(myxedema, exophthalmos
and clubbing)
Hypervitaminosis A
Malnutrition

Fig. 704.1 Spoon nails (koilonychia). Most cases are a variant of normal. (From Habif TP, ed. Clinical Dermatology, 4th ed. Philadelphia:
Mosby; 2004:885.)

Limited to one or
more digits

Aortic/subclavian artery
aneurysm
Brachial plexus injury
Trauma
Maffucci’s syndrome
Gout
Sarcoidosis
Severe herpetic whitlow

Hereditary

Pachydermoperiostosis
Familial, isolated
Apert’s syndrome
Pfeiffer’s syndrome
Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome

Pseudoclubbing*

Fig. 704.2 Finger clubbing. The distal phalanges are enlarged to a

rounded bulbous shape. The nail enlarges and becomes curved, hard,
and thickened. (From Habif TP, ed. Clinical Dermatology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2004:885.)

and nephropathy, the most serious feature, may also be present. Nail-­
patella syndrome is caused by pathogenic variants in the transcription
factor LMX1B gene.
For a discussion of pachyonychia congenita, see Chapter 699.
Habit tic deformity consists of a depression down the center of the
nail with numerous horizontal ridges extending across the nail from it.
One or both thumbs are usually involved as a result of chronic rubbing
and picking at the nail with an adjacent finger. Treatment aims at cessation of trauma to the nail via massaging with bland ointments, physical
barriers, or cyanoacrylate adhesive.
Clubbing of the nails is characterized by swelling of each distal digit,
an increase in the angle between the nail plate and the proximal nail
fold (Lovibond angle) to >180 degrees, and a spongy feeling when one
pushes down and away from the interphalangeal joint because of an
increase in fibrovascular tissue between the matrix and the phalanx
(Fig. 704.2). The pathogenesis is not known. Nail clubbing is seen in
association with diseases of numerous organ systems, including pulmonary, cardiovascular (cyanotic heart disease), gastrointestinal
(celiac disease, inflammatory bowel disease), and hepatic (chronic
hepatitis) systems, and in healthy individuals as an idiopathic or familial finding (Table 704.3).

*Broad distal phalanges with normally shaped nails.
Modified from Baran R, Dawber RPR. Diseases of the Nails and Their Management.
Oxford: Blackwell Science; 1984:29.

CHANGES IN NAIL COLOR

Leukonychia is a white opacity of the nail plate that may involve the
entire plate or may be punctate or striate (see Table 704.1). The nail
plate itself remains smooth and undamaged. Leukonychia can be
traumatic or associated with infections such as leprosy and tuberculosis, dermatoses such as lichen planus and Darier disease, malignancies such as Hodgkin disease, anemia, and arsenic poisoning (Mees
lines). Leukonychia of all nail surfaces is an uncommon hereditary
autosomal dominant trait that may be associated with congenital epidermal cysts and renal calculi. Paired parallel white bands that do not
change position with growth of the nail, fade with pressure, and thus
reflect a change in the nail bed are associated with hypoalbuminemia
and are called Muehrcke lines. When the proximal portion of the nail
is white and the distal 20–50% of the nail is red, pink, or brown, the
condition is called half-­and-­half nails or Lindsay nails; this is seen
most commonly in patients with renal disease but may occur as a
normal variant. White nails of cirrhosis, or Terry nails (Fig. 704.3),
are characterized by a white ground-­glass appearance of the entire or
the proximal end of the nail and a normal pink distal 1-­2 mm of the
nail; this finding can also be associated with congestive heart failure
and adult-­onset diabetes and can be normal in children less than 4
years old.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4144 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 704.3 Terry nails. The nail bed is white with only a narrow zone of

pink at the distal end. (From Habif TP, ed. Clinical Dermatology, 4th ed.
Philadelphia: Mosby; 2004:885.)

Fig. 704.5 Splinter hemorrhage of the distal nail bed due to trauma.
(From Hordinsky M, Sawaya ME, Scher RK. Atlas of Hair and Nails. London: Churchill Livingstone; 1999.)

Table 704.4  Disorders Associated with Subungual
Hemorrhage

Fig. 704.4 Green/black discoloration at the edge of the nails secondary to Pseudomonas infection.

Black pigmentation of an entire nail plate or linear bands of pigmentation (melanonychia striata) is most common in individuals
with Fitzpatrick type IV-­VI skin. Most often, the pigment is melanin,
which is produced by melanocytes of a junctional nevus in the nail
matrix and nail bed and is of no consequence. Extension or alteration
in the pigment should be evaluated by biopsy because of the possibility
of malignant change.
Bluish black to greenish nails may be caused by Pseudomonas
infection (Fig. 704.4), particularly in association with onycholysis or
chronic paronychia. The coloration is caused by subungual debris and
pyocyanin pigment from the bacterial organisms.
Yellow nail syndrome manifests as thickened, excessively curved,
slow-­growing yellow nails without lunulae. All nails are affected in
most cases. Associated systemic diseases include bronchiectasis, recurrent bronchitis, chylothorax, and focal edema of the limbs and face.
Deficient lymphatic drainage, caused by hypoplastic lymphatic vessels,
is believed to lead to the manifestations of this syndrome.
Splinter hemorrhages most often result from minor trauma but
may also be associated with subacute bacterial endocarditis, vasculitis,
Langerhans cell histiocytosis, severe rheumatoid arthritis, peptic ulcer
disease, hypertension, chronic glomerulonephritis, cirrhosis, scurvy,
trichinosis, malignant neoplasms, and psoriasis (Fig. 704.5 and Table
704.4).

NAIL SEPARATION

Onycholysis indicates separation of the nail plate from the distal nail
bed. Common causes are trauma, long-­term exposure to moisture,
hyperhidrosis, cosmetics, psoriasis, fungal infection (distal onycholysis), atopic or contact dermatitis, porphyria, drugs (bleomycin, vincristine, retinoid agents, indomethacin, chlorpromazine [Thorazine]), and
drug-­induced phototoxicity from tetracyclines (Fig. 704.6) or chloramphenicol (Table 704.5).

SPLINTER-­SHAPED

HEMATOMAS

Normal variant

+

−

Blood dyscrasias

+

+

Collagen diseases (lupus
erythematosus)

+

+

Trichinosis

+

−

Trauma

+

+

Child abuse

+

+

Cryoglobulinemia

+

−

Drug eruptions

+

−

Dialysis

+

−

Endocarditis (SBE)

+

−

Emboli

+

+

Langerhans cells
histiocytosis

+

−

Arterial lines or punctures

+

−

Sarcoidosis

+

−

Sepsis

+

−

Thyroid disease

+

−

Vasculitis

+

−

Phototoxicity
(tetracyclines)

+

−

From Silverman R, Baran R. Nail and appendageal abnormalities. In: Schachner LA,
Hansen RC, eds. Pediatric Dermatology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2011, Table 12.9,
p. 813.

Beau lines are transverse grooves in the nail plate (Fig. 704.7) that
represent a temporary disruption of formation of the nail plate. The
lines first appear a few weeks after the event that caused the disruption
in nail growth. A single transverse ridge appears at the proximal nail
fold in most 4-­to 6-­week-­old infants and works its way distally as the
nail grows; this line may reflect metabolic changes after delivery. At

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 704 u Disorders of the Nails

Fig. 704.6 Distal onycholysis secondary to oral tetracycline usage
and ultraviolet light exposure.

4145

Fig. 704.7 Beau lines. Longitudinal disruption of the nail.

Table 704.5  Underlying Causes of Onycholysis
CHEMICAL IRRITANTS
Cosmetics, especially with formaldehyde
Depilatories
Detergents
Nail polish removers
Organic solvents
INFLAMMATORY DISORDERS
Alopecia areata
Atopic dermatitis
Contact dermatitis
Lichen planus
Psoriasis
INFECTIOUS DISORDERS
Bacterial paronychia
Candidiasis
Herpes simplex (whitlow)
Onychomycosis
Verrucae
MEDICATIONS
Anticonvulsants (valproic acid)
Chemotherapeutic agents (especially taxanes)
Griseofulvin
Retinoids (isotretinoin)
Tetracyclines (photoonycholysis)
Thiazides (photoonycholysis)
SYSTEMIC DISORDERS
Iron-­deficiency anemia
Rheumatic disease
Thyroid disease (hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism)
Kawasaki disease
MIS-C

Fig. 704.8 Onychomadesis. Proximal nail bed separation.
leukonychia, longitudinal ridging, thinning of the entire nail plate, and
pterygium formation, which is abnormal adherence of the cuticle to the
nail plate or, if the plate is destroyed focally, to the nail bed. Postinfectious reactive arthritis syndromes may include painless erythematous
induration of the base of the nail fold; subungual parakeratotic scaling;
and thickening, opacification, or ridging of the nail plate. Dermatitis that
involves the nail folds may produce dystrophy, roughening, and coarse
pitting of the nails. Nail changes are more common in atopic dermatitis
than in other forms of dermatitis that affect the hands. Darier disease is
characterized by red or white streaks that extend longitudinally and cross
the lunula. Where the streak meets the distal end of the nail, a V-­shaped
notch may be present. Total leukonychia may also occur. Transverse rows
of fine pits are characteristic of alopecia areata. In severe cases, the entire
nail surface may be rough. Patients with acrodermatitis enteropathica
may have transverse grooves (Beau lines) and nail dystrophy as a result
of periungual dermatitis.

TRACHYONYCHIA (20-­NAIL DYSTROPHY)

other ages, Beau lines are usually indicative of periodic trauma or episodic shutdown of the nail matrix secondary to a systemic disease such
as hand-­foot-­and-­mouth disease, measles, mumps, pneumonia, or zinc
deficiency. Onychomadesis is an exaggeration of Beau lines leading to
proximal separation of the nail bed (Fig. 704.8).

Trachyonychia is characterized by longitudinal ridging, pitting, fragility,
thinning, distal notching, and opalescent discoloration of all the nails (Fig.
704.9). Patients can have no associated skin or systemic diseases and no
other ectodermal defects. Its occasional association with alopecia areata has
led some authorities to suggest that trachyonychia may reflect an abnormal
immunologic response to the nail matrix, whereas histopathologic studies
have suggested that it may be a manifestation of lichen planus, psoriasis,
or spongiotic (eczematous) inflammation of the nail matrix. The disorder must be differentiated from fungal infections, psoriasis, nail changes
of alopecia areata, and nail dystrophy secondary to eczema. Eczema and
fungal infections rarely produce changes in all the nails simultaneously.
The disorder is self-­limited, can be treated with potent topical steroids or
topical retinoids, and eventually remits by adulthood.

NAIL CHANGES ASSOCIATED WITH SKIN DISEASE

NAIL INFECTION

TRAUMA
Compulsive subungual cleaning
Sportsman toe
MIS-C, multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children.
From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022, Box 7.9, p. 201.

Nail changes may be particularly associated with various other diseases.
Nail changes of psoriasis most characteristically include pitting, onycholysis, yellow-­brown discoloration, and thickening. Nail changes in lichen
planus include violaceous papules in the proximal nail fold and nail bed,

Fungal infection (onychomycosis) of the nails has been classified into four
types. White superficial onychomycosis manifests as diffuse or speckled
white discoloration of the surface of the toenails. It is caused primarily by
Trichophyton mentagrophytes, which invades the nail plate. The organism

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4146 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 704.6  Differential Diagnosis of Onychomycosis

Fig. 704.9 Dystrophy of all nails in trachyonychia.

Fig. 704.10 Discoloration, hyperkeratosis, and crumbling of nail secondary to dermatophyte infection.

may be scraped off the nail plate with a blade, but treatment is best accomplished by the addition of a topical azole antifungal agent. Distal subungual onychomycosis, the most common type, involves foci of onycholysis
under the distal nail plate or along the lateral nail groove, followed by
development of hyperkeratosis and yellow-­brown discoloration. The process extends proximally, resulting in nail plate thickening, crumbling (Fig.
704.10), and separation from the nail bed. Trichophyton rubrum and, occasionally, T. mentagrophytes infect the toenails; fingernail disease is almost
exclusively caused by T. rubrum, which may be associated with superficial
scaling of the plantar surface of the feet and often of one hand. The dermatophytes are found most readily at the most proximal area of the nail bed
or adjacent ventral portion of the involved nail plates. Topical therapies
such as ciclopirox 8% lacquer, amorolfine 5% lacquer, or bifonazole-­urea
1%/40% ointment may be effective for solitary nail infection. Topical efinaconazole 10% and topical tavaborole 5% solution may also be effective;
laser treatment is an expensive but safe alternative to oral therapy. Because
of its long half-­life in the nail, oral itraconazole may be effective when
given as pulse therapy (1 week of each month for 3-­4 months). Dosage
is weight-­dependent. Oral daily terbinafine is also quite effective. Either
agent is superior to griseofulvin, fluconazole, or ketoconazole. The risks,
the most concerning of which is hepatic toxicity, and costs of oral therapy
are minimized with the use of pulsed dosing.
Proximal white subungual onychomycosis occurs when the organism,
generally T. rubrum, enters the nail through the proximal nail fold, producing yellow-­white discoloration of portions of the undersurface of the
nail plate. The surface of the nail is unaffected. This occurs almost exclusively in immunocompromised patients and is a well-­recognized manifestation of AIDS. Treatment includes oral terbinafine or itraconazole.
Candidal onychomycosis involves the entire nail plate in patients with
chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis. It is also commonly seen in patients
with AIDS. The organism, generally Candida albicans, enters distally or

Psoriasis
• As in onychomycosis: onycholysis, subungual hyperkeratosis,
splinter hemorrhages, leukonychia, dystrophy
• Pitting
• Oil drop sign (a translucent yellow-­red discoloration seen in the
nail bed)
• Other cutaneous features of psoriasis, family history of psoriasis
Lichen planus
• Cutaneous disease at other sites
• Thin nail plate and ridging
• Dorsal pterygium—scarring at proximal aspect of nail
Trauma
• Nail plate can appear abnormal
• Nail bed should be normal
• Distal onycholysis with repeated trauma
• Single nail affected, shape of nail changed, homogenous
alteration of nail color
Eczema
• Irregular buckled nails with ridging
• Cutaneous signs of eczema
Yellow nail syndrome
• Nail plate is discolored green-­yellow
• Nails are hard with elevated longitudinal curvature
• Nails may be shed, painful
• Associations with bronchiectasis, lymphedema, and chronic
sinusitis
Lamellar onychoschizia (lamellar splitting)
• History of repeated soaking in water
• Usually distal portion of nail
• Periungual squamous cell carcinoma/Bowens disease
• Single nail, warty changes of nail fold; ooze from edge of nail
Malignant melanoma
• Black discoloration of nail plate or nail bed
• Pigment can extend onto nail fold
• Can get associated bleeding
Myxoid (mucous) cyst
• Cyst at base of nail, groove in nail extending length of nail
Alopecia areata
• Pits, longitudinal ridging, brittleness
• Hair loss
From Eisman S, Sinclair R. Fungal nail infection: diagnosis and management. BMJ.
2014;348:g1800.

along the lateral nail folds; rapidly involves the entire thickness of the nail
plate; and produces thickening, crumbling, and deformity of the plate.
Topical azole antifungal agents may be sufficient for treatment of candidal onychomycosis in an immunocompetent host, but oral antifungal
agents are necessary for treatment of patients with immune deficiencies.
Table 704.6 outlines the differential diagnosis of onychomycosis.

PARONYCHIAL INFLAMMATION

Paronychial inflammation may be acute or chronic and generally involves
one or two nail folds on the fingers. Acute paronychia manifests as erythema, warmth, edema, and tenderness of the proximal nail fold, most
commonly as a result of pathogenic staphylococci, streptococci, or Candida (Fig. 704.11). Warm soaks and oral agents are generally effective;
incision and drainage may occasionally be necessary. Development of
chronic paronychia follows prolonged immersion in water (Fig. 704.12),
such as occurs in finger or thumb sucking; exposure to irritating solutions; nail fold trauma; or diseases including Raynaud phenomenon, collagen vascular diseases, and diabetes. Swelling of the proximal nail fold
is followed by separation of the nail fold from the underlying nail plate
and suppuration. Foreign material, embedded in the dermis of the nail
fold, becomes a nidus for inflammation and secondary infection with
Candida species and mixed bacterial flora. A combination of attention to
predisposing factors, meticulous drying of the hands, and long-­term topical antifungal agents and potent topical corticosteroids may be required
for successful treatment of chronic paronychia.
Ingrown nail occurs when the lateral edge of the nail, including spicules that have separated from the nail plate, penetrates the soft tissue of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 705 u Disorders of the Mucous Membranes 4147
prominent; and (3) improper cutting of the nail in a curvilinear manner rather than straight across. Management includes proper fitting of
shoes; allowing the nail to grow out beyond the free edge before cutting
it straight across; warm water soaks; oral antibiotics if cellulitis affects
the lateral nail fold; and, in severe, recurrent cases, application of silver nitrate to granulation tissue, nail avulsion, or excision of the lateral
aspect of the nail followed by matricectomy.

PARONYCHIAL TUMORS

Tumors in the paronychial area include pyogenic granulomas, mucous
cysts, subungual exostoses, and junctional nevi. Periungual fibromas
that appear in late childhood should suggest a diagnosis of tuberous
sclerosis.
Fig. 704.11 Acute paronychia secondary to Staphylococcus aureus.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 705

Disorders of the Mucous
Membranes
Leah Lalor

Fig. 704.12 Chronic paronychia with erythema and lateral nail fold
separation.

The mucous membranes may be involved in developmental disorders, genodermatoses, infections, acute and chronic skin diseases, and
benign or malignant tumors. This chapter includes some of the more
common and more distinctive conditions of the mucous membranes,
but is not exhaustive (see also Chapter 695 for erythema multiforme,
Stevens-­Johnson syndrome, and reactive infectious mucocutaneous
eruption [RIME]).

ANGULAR CHEILITIS

Fig. 704.13 Clinical features of an 8-­yr-­old boy upon initial presentation to a dermatology clinic. Findings included yellowish-­brown discoloration, hyperkeratosis, transverse ridging, and lateral deviation of
the bilateral great toenails. (From Pollack K, Zlotoff B, Wilson B. Hyperkeratosis and discoloration of the toenails in an 8-­year-­old. J Pediatr.
2017;189:233.)

the lateral nail fold. Erythema, edema, and pain, most often involving
the lateral great toes, are noted acutely; recurrent episodes may lead
to formation of granulation tissue. Predisposing factors include (1)
congenital malalignment (especially of the great toes) (Fig.704.13); (2)
compression of the side of the toe from poorly fitting shoes, particularly if the great toes are abnormally long and the lateral nail folds are

Angular cheilitis (perlèche) is characterized by inflammation and
fissuring at the corners of the mouth, often with associated erosion,
maceration, and crusting (Fig. 705.1). Chapping or moisture collection
at the angles of the mouth predispose children to developing angular
cheilitis. Children who are chronic lip lickers or who have excessive
salivation or drooling related to neurologic deficits, orthodontic appliances, or mouth breathing are at increased risk. Atopic dermatitis or
contact dermatitis related to toothpaste, chewing gum, mouthwash,
or cosmetics are also common causes. Nutritional deficiencies are a
less frequent etiology. Protection can be provided by frequent application of a bland ointment such as petrolatum. Candidiasis should be
treated with an appropriate antifungal agent, and contact dermatitis
of the perioral skin should be treated with a low-­potency topical corticosteroid ointment preparation and frequent use of petrolatum or a
similar emollient along with avoidance of the offending agent. Correction of the underlying predisposing factors (if possible) will prevent
recurrence.

APHTHOUS STOMATITIS (CANKER SORES)

Aphthous stomatitis consists of solitary or multiple painful ulcerations
occurring on the labial (Fig. 705.2), buccal, lingual, sublingual, palatal,
or gingival mucosa (see Chapter 361). Lesions may manifest initially as
erythematous, indurated papules that erode rapidly to form sharply circumscribed, necrotic ulcers with a gray fibrinous exudate and an erythematous halo. Minor aphthous ulcers are 2-­10 mm in diameter and
heal spontaneously in 7-­10 days. Major aphthous ulcers are >10 mm
in diameter, take from 10 to 30 days to heal, and may heal with scarring. A third type of aphthous ulceration is herpetiform in appearance,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4148 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 705.3 Mucocele on lower lip.

Fig. 705.1 Angular cheilitis.

buccal mucosa. They are a common clinical finding and represent a
normal anatomic variant of sebaceous glands. They can present in
either sex from infancy to adulthood and may become more prominent during puberty due to the influence of androgens. No therapy is
required.

EPSTEIN PEARLS (GINGIVAL CYSTS OF THE
NEWBORN)

Epstein pearls are white, keratin-­containing cysts on the palatal or
alveolar mucosa of approximately 60–85% of neonates. They are
epidermal inclusion cysts that form when the soft and hard palates
fuse and are analogous to facial milia. They cause no symptoms and
are generally shed within a few weeks; no therapy is necessary.

Fig. 705.2 Aphthous ulceration on lower lip.

manifesting as a few to numerous grouped 1-­to 2-­mm lesions, which
tend to coalesce into plaques and heal over 7-­10 days. Approximately
30% of patients with recurrent lesions have a family history of the disorder (see Chapter 361 for the differential diagnosis).
The etiology of aphthous stomatitis is multifactorial; the condition probably represents an oral manifestation of a number of
conditions, including viral infection, inflammatory bowel disease,
cyclic neutropenia, and others. Altered local regulation of the cell-­
mediated immune system, after activation and accumulation of
cytotoxic T cells, may contribute to the localized mucosal breakdown. It is a common misconception that aphthous stomatitis is a
manifestation of herpes simplex virus infection. Recurrent herpes
infections remain localized to the lips and rarely cross the mucocutaneous junction; involvement of the oral mucosa occurs only in
primary infections.
Treatment of aphthous stomatitis is supportive. The majority of
mild cases do not require therapy. Relief of pain, particularly before
eating, may be achieved with the use of a topical anesthetic such as
viscous lidocaine or an oral rinse with a combined solution of elixir
of diphenhydramine, viscous lidocaine, and an oral antacid. Caution
must be taken to avoid hot food and drink after topical anesthetic
use. A superpotent topical corticosteroid in a mucosa-­adhering agent
may help to reduce inflammation, and topical tetracycline mouthwash may also hasten healing. In severe, debilitating cases, systemic
therapy with corticosteroids, colchicine, dapsone, or thalidomide
may be helpful.

FORDYCE SPOTS

Fordyce spots (Fordyce granules) are clusters of asymptomatic, 1-­to
3-­mm, yellow-­white macules and papules on the vermilion lips and

MUCOCELE

Mucus retention cysts are painless, fluctuant, tense, 2-­to 10-­mm, bluish papules on the lips (Fig. 705.3), tongue, palate, or buccal mucosa.
Traumatic severance of the duct of a minor salivary gland leads to
submucosal retention of mucus secretion. Lesions on the floor of the
mouth are known as ranulas when the sublingual or submandibular
salivary gland ducts are involved. Fluctuations in size are typical, and
the lesions may disappear temporarily after traumatic rupture. Recurrence is prevented by surgical excision of the mucus deposit and associated salivary gland(s).

FISSURED TONGUE

Fissured tongue (scrotal tongue, or lingua plicata) is a common
benign developmental anomaly of the tongue. The dorsal tongue has
many folds with deep grooves and a pebbled appearance. Fissured
tongue can be seen in individuals with Melkersson-­Rosenthal syndrome and Down syndrome, and it is often seen in association with
geographic tongue. Food particles and debris may become trapped
in the fissures, resulting in irritation, inflammation, and halitosis.
Careful cleansing with a mouth rinse and soft-­bristled toothbrush is
recommended.

GEOGRAPHIC TONGUE (BENIGN MIGRATORY
GLOSSITIS)

Geographic tongue consists of single or multiple sharply demarcated,
irregular, smooth, red patches surrounded by an elevated yellowish-­
white serpiginous border on the dorsum of the tongue. Onset is rapid,
and the pattern may change over hours to days. The smooth patches
correspond to atrophic filiform papillae, and the elevated margins represent hypertrophic papillae (Fig. 705.4). The etiology of this condition remains unclear, though it is associated with some inflammatory
disorders of the skin like psoriasis. Lesions are typically asymptomatic,
but some patients may experience a burning sensation or sensitivity to spicy, hot, or cold foods. No therapy other than reassurance is
necessary.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 705 u Disorders of the Mucous Membranes 4149

Fig. 705.4 Geographic tongue.

is most prevalent in Africa but also occurs in Asia and Latin America. Sporadic cases associated with immunodeficiency have been
reported in developed countries. It manifests as a painful, red,
indurated papule on the alveolar margin, followed by ulceration
and mutilating gangrenous destruction of tissue in the oronasal
region. The process may also involve the scalp, neck, shoulders,
perineum, and vulva. Noma neonatorum manifests in the first
month of life as gangrenous lesions of the lips, nose, mouth, and
anal regions. Affected infants are usually small for gestational age,
malnourished, premature, and frequently ill (particularly with
Pseudomonas aeruginosa sepsis). Care consists of nutritional support, conservative debridement of necrotic soft tissues, empirical
broad-­spectrum antibiotics such as penicillin and metronidazole,
and, in the case of noma neonatorum, antipseudomonal antibiotics
(see Chapter 62).

PTEN HAMARTOMA SYNDROME (COWDEN
SYNDROME)
BLACK HAIRY TONGUE

Black hairy tongue is a dark coating on the dorsum of the tongue
caused by hyperplasia and elongation of the filiform papillae; overgrowth of chromogenic bacteria and fungi and entrapped pigmented
residues that adsorb to microbial plaque and desquamating keratin
may contribute to the dark coloration. Changes often begin posteriorly and extend anteriorly on the dorsum of the tongue. The
condition is most common in adults but may also manifest during
adolescence. Poor oral hygiene, lack of oral feeding, treatment with
systemic antibiotics such as tetracycline (which promote the growth
of Candida spp.), and smoking are predisposing factors. Improved
oral hygiene and brushing with a soft-­bristled toothbrush may be all
that is necessary for treatment.

ORAL HAIRY LEUKOPLAKIA

Oral hairy leukoplakia occurs in approximately 25% of patients
with AIDS but is rare in the pediatric population. It manifests as
corrugated and shaggy white plaques on the lateral margins of the
tongue, which cannot be removed by rubbing. The lesions occasionally may spread to the ventral tongue surface, floor of the mouth,
tonsillar pillars, and pharynx. The condition is caused by Epstein-­
Barr virus, which is present in the upper layer of the affected epithelium. The plaques have no malignant potential. The disorder occurs
predominantly in HIV-­infected patients but may also be found in
individuals who are immunosuppressed for other reasons, such as
organ transplantation, leukemia, chemotherapy, and long-­term use
of inhaled steroids. The condition is generally asymptomatic and
does not require therapy.

ACUTE NECROTIZING ULCERATIVE GINGIVITIS
(VINCENT STOMATITIS, FUSOSPIROCHETAL
GINGIVITIS, TRENCH MOUTH)

Acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis manifests as painful, punched-­
out ulceration, necrosis, and bleeding of the interdental papillae. A
grayish-­white pseudomembrane may cover the ulcerations. Lesions
may spread to involve the buccal mucosa, lips, tongue, tonsils, and
pharynx and may be associated with dental pain, a bad taste, low-­grade
fever, and lymphadenopathy. It occurs most commonly in the second
or third decade, particularly in the context of poor dental hygiene, poor
nutrition, smoking, and stress.

NOMA

Noma is a severe form of fusospirillary gangrenous stomatitis that
occurs primarily in malnourished, impoverished children 2-­5 years
of age who have had a preceding illness such as measles, scarlet
fever, tuberculosis, malignancy, or immunodeficiency. The disease

PTEN hamartoma syndrome is an autosomal dominant condition
caused by loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants in the PTEN tumor-­
suppressor gene. Mucocutaneous lesions typically appear in the
second or third decade. Oral papillomas are 1-­to 3-­mm, smooth,
pink or whitish papules on the palatal, gingival, buccal, and labial
mucosae and may coalesce into a cobblestone appearance. Numerous flesh-­colored papules also develop on the face, particularly
around the mouth, nose, and ears. These papules are most commonly trichilemmomas, a benign neoplasm of the hair follicle.
Associated findings may include acral keratoses, thyroid adenoma,
goiter, gastrointestinal polyps, fibrocystic breast nodules, and carcinoma of the breast or thyroid.

Herpes Simplex Virus Infection

Herpes simplex virus (HSV) types 1 and 2 commonly cause primary
and recurrent infection, resulting in grouped vesicles on oral, nasal,
and genital mucosae.

Erythema Multiforme

Erythema multiforme (EM) is an uncommon disorder of mucocutaneous blistering typically on the labial mucosa and acral skin as a reaction
to HSV infection. Please see Chapter 695.1 for more detail.

Stevens-­Johnson Syndrome

Stevens-­Johnson syndrome (SJS) is an uncommon disorder of skin
sloughing that occurs primarily after exposure to a medication. It can
have extensive mucosal involvement in addition to skin. Please see
Chapter 695.3 for more detail.

Reactive Infectious Mucocutaneous Eruption
(Formerly Mycoplasma-­Induced Rash and Mucositis)

This condition is on the spectrum of SJS and toxic epidermal necrolysis
(TEN), but tends to be triggered by various infections and has more
mucosal involvement than cutaneous. Please see Chapter 695.2 for
more detail.

Lichen Sclerosus

Lichen sclerosus is a rare disorder of genital mucosa typically seen
in young girls and elderly women. It manifests as pink and white
atrophic genital mucosa that can be associated with pain, dysuria, constipation, and bleeding. Please see Chapter 586 for more
details.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4150 Part XXIX u The Skin

Chapter 706

Cutaneous Bacterial
Infections
706.1 Impetigo
Stephen R. Humphrey

ETIOLOGY/PATHOGENESIS

Impetigo is the most common skin infection in children throughout
the world. Invasive Staphylococcus aureus has a global incidence of
approximately 20-­50 cases/100,000 population per year. There are two
classic forms of impetigo: nonbullous and bullous.
S. aureus is the predominant organism of nonbullous impetigo
in the United States (see Chapter 227); group A β-­hemolytic streptococci (GABHS) are implicated in the development of some lesions (see
Chapter 229). The staphylococcal types that cause nonbullous impetigo
are variable but are not generally from phage group 2, the group that is
associated with scalded skin and toxic shock syndromes. Staphylococci
generally spread from the nose to normal skin and then infect the skin.
In contrast, the skin becomes colonized with GABHS an average of
10 days before development of impetigo. The skin serves as the source
for acquisition of GABHS and is the probable primary source for the
spread of impetigo. Lesions of nonbullous impetigo that grow staphylococci in culture cannot be distinguished clinically from those that
grow pure cultures of GABHS.
Bullous impetigo is always caused by S. aureus strains that produce
exfoliative toxins. The staphylococcal exfoliative toxins (ETA, ETB,
ETD) blister the superficial epidermis by hydrolyzing human desmoglein 1, resulting in a subcorneal vesicle. This is also the target antigen
of the autoantibodies in pemphigus foliaceus.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Nonbullous Impetigo

Nonbullous impetigo accounts for more than 70% of cases. Lesions
typically begin on the skin of the face or on extremities that have been
traumatized. The most common lesions that precede nonbullous impetigo are insect bites, abrasions, lacerations, chickenpox, scabies pediculosis, and burns. A tiny vesicle or pustule forms initially and rapidly
develops into a honey-­colored crusted plaque that is generally <2 cm
in diameter (Fig. 706.1). The infection may be spread to other parts of
the body by the fingers, clothing, and towels. Lesions are associated
with little to no pain or surrounding erythema, and constitutional
symptoms are generally absent. Pruritus occurs occasionally, regional

adenopathy is found in up to 90% of cases, and leukocytosis is present
in approximately 50%.

Bullous Impetigo

Bullous impetigo is mainly an infection of infants and young children.
Flaccid, transparent bullae develop most commonly on skin of the
face, buttocks, trunk, perineum, and extremities. Neonatal bullous
impetigo can begin in the diaper area. Rupture of a bulla occurs easily,
leaving a narrow rim of scale at the edge of a shallow, moist erosion.
Surrounding erythema and regional adenopathy are generally absent.
Unlike those of nonbullous impetigo, lesions of bullous impetigo are a
manifestation of localized staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome and
develop on intact skin.

Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of nonbullous impetigo includes viruses
(herpes simplex, varicella-­
zoster), fungi (tinea corporis, kerion),
arthropod bites, and parasitic infestations (scabies, pediculosis capitis),
all of which may become impetiginized.
The differential diagnosis of bullous impetigo in neonates includes
epidermolysis bullosa, bullous mastocytosis, herpetic infection, and
early staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome. In older children, allergic
contact dermatitis, burns, erythema multiforme, linear immunoglobulin A dermatosis, pemphigus, and bullous pemphigoid must be considered, particularly if the lesions do not respond to therapy.

COMPLICATIONS

Potential but very rare complications of either nonbullous or bullous
impetigo include bacteremia with subsequent osteomyelitis, septic
arthritis, pneumonia, and septicemia. Positive blood culture results are
very rare in otherwise healthy children with localized lesions. Cellulitis
has been reported in up to 10% of patients with nonbullous impetigo
and rarely follows the bullous form. Lymphangitis, suppurative lymphadenitis, guttate psoriasis, and scarlet fever occasionally follow streptococcal disease. There is no correlation between the number of lesions
and clinical involvement of the lymphatics or development of cellulitis
in association with streptococcal impetigo.
Infection with nephritogenic strains of GABHS may result in acute
poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis (see Chapter 559.4). The clinical character of impetigo lesions does not predict the development of
poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis. Children 3-­7 years of age are
most commonly affected. The latent period from onset of impetigo to
development of poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis averages 18-­21
days, which is longer than the 10-­day latency period after pharyngitis.
Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis occurs epidemically after either
pharyngeal or skin infection. Impetigo-­associated epidemics have been
caused by M groups 2, 49, 53, 55, 56, 57, and 60. Strains of GABHS that
are associated with endemic impetigo in the United States have little or
no nephritogenic potential. Acute rheumatic fever does not occur as a
result of impetigo.

TREATMENT

Fig. 706.1 Multiple crusted and oozing lesions of impetigo.

The decision on how to treat impetigo depends on the number of
lesions and their locations. Topical therapy with mupirocin 2% and
retapamulin 1% 2-­3 times a day for 10-­14 days is acceptable for localized disease caused by S. aureus, though there are resistant strains to
these topical antibiotics.
Systemic therapy with oral antibiotics should be prescribed for
patients with streptococcal or widespread involvement of staphylococcal
infections; when lesions are near the mouth, where topical medication
may be licked off; or in cases with evidence of deep involvement, including cellulitis, furunculosis, abscess formation, or suppurative lymphadenitis. Cephalexin 25-­50 mg/kg/day in three to four divided doses
for 7 days is an excellent choice for initial therapy. A culture should be
performed, as the emergence of methicillin-­resistant S. aureus (MRSA)
typically requires a different antibiotic choice based on antibiotic susceptibility patterns. If MRSA is suspected, clindamycin, doxycycline, or
sulfamethoxazole-­trimethoprim is indicated. No evidence suggests that
a 10-­day course of therapy is superior to a 7-­day course; twice-­daily

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 706 u Cutaneous Bacterial Infections

4151

sulfamethoxazole trimethoprim for 3 days has been comparable to once
daily for 5 days. Benzathine benzylpenicillin IM has been used when
compliance with multiple-­dose and -­day oral antibiotics may be poor.

SETTING OR EXPOSURE

CAUSES OF CELLULITIS

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Cat or dog bites

Pasteurella species, Capnocytophaga
canimorsus

Penetrating trauma

Staphylococcus aureus

Freshwater immersion

Aeromonas hydrophila

Saltwater immersion

Vibrio species

Freshwater, saltwater fish

Streptococcus iniae

Swine, poultry, fish

Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae

Periorbital or facial cellulitis

Haemophilus influenzae,
Streptococcus pneumoniae

Neutropenia

Pseudomonas aeruginosa, other
gram-­negative bacilli

Human immunodeficiency
virus infection

Helicobacter cinaedi

Acute varicella

Streptococcus pyogenes

Immunosuppression

Cryptococcus neoformans

706.2 Subcutaneous Tissue Infections
Stephen R. Humphrey
The principal determinations for soft tissue infection are whether it
is nonnecrotizing or necrotizing and purulent or nonpurulent. Nonnecrotizing, nonpurulent lesions respond to antibiotic therapy alone,
whereas necrotizing or purulent (abscess) lesions require prompt surgical removal of all devitalized tissue in addition to antimicrobial therapy. Necrotizing soft tissue infections are life-­threatening conditions
that are characterized by rapidly advancing local tissue destruction and
systemic toxicity, including shock. Tissue necrosis distinguishes soft
tissue infections from cellulitis. In cellulitis, an inflammatory infectious process involves subcutaneous tissue but does not destroy it. Necrotizing soft tissue infections may initially manifest with a paucity of
early cutaneous signs relative to the rapidity and degree of destruction
of the subcutaneous tissues.

CELLULITIS
Etiology

Cellulitis is characterized by infection and inflammation of loose connective tissue, with limited involvement of the dermis and relative
sparing of the epidermis. A break in the skin from previous trauma,
insect bite, surgery, or an underlying skin lesion predisposes to cellulitis. Cellulitis is also more common in individuals with lymphatic stasis,
diabetes mellitus, or immunosuppression.
S. aureus and Streptococcus pyogenes (group A streptococcus) are the
most common etiologic agents. In patients who are immunocompromised or have diabetes mellitus, other bacterial or fungal agents may be
involved, notably Pseudomonas aeruginosa; Aeromonas hydrophila and,
occasionally, other Enterobacteriaceae; Legionella spp.; the Mucorales,
particularly Rhizopus spp., Mucor spp., and Absidia spp.; and Cryptococcus neoformans. Children with relapsed nephrotic syndrome may
experience cellulitis caused by Escherichia coli. In children 3 months
to 5 years of age, Haemophilus influenzae type b was once an important cause of facial cellulitis, but its incidence has declined significantly
since the institution of immunization against this organism.
Environmental risk factors include exposure to fish, shellfish, and
meats (Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae); salt water, or brackish inland
waterways (Vibrio vulnificus); penetrating trauma (mixed pathogens
including Clostridium perfringens); and human or animal bites (see
Chapter 765) (Table 706.1).

Clinical Manifestations

Cellulitis manifests clinically as a localized area of edema, warmth,
erythema, and tenderness. The lateral margins tend to be indistinct
because the process is deep in the skin, primarily involving the subcutaneous tissues in addition to the dermis. Application of pressure may
produce pitting. Although distinction cannot be made with certainty
in any particular patient, cellulitis due to S. aureus tends to be more
localized and may suppurate, whereas infections caused by S. pyogenes
(group A streptococci) tend to spread more rapidly and may be associated with lymphangitis. Regional adenopathy and constitutional signs
and symptoms such as fever, chills, and malaise are common. Complications of cellulitis are uncommon but include subcutaneous abscess,
bacteremia, osteomyelitis, septic arthritis, thrombophlebitis, endocarditis, and necrotizing fasciitis. Lymphangitis or glomerulonephritis can
also follow infection with S. pyogenes.

Diagnosis

Cellulitis in a neonate should prompt assessment for invasive bacterial infection, including blood culture; lumbar puncture is also usually

Table 706.1  Special Considerations for Causes of Cellulitis

From Long SS, Prober CG, Fischer M. Principles and Practice of Pediatric Infectious
Diseases, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Table 68.3, p. 444.

performed, though its necessity for mild cases of cellulitis is controversial in this age-­group. In older children, cultures of blood or cutaneous
aspirates, biopsies, or swabs are not routinely recommended. However,
blood cultures should be considered if the patient is younger than 1 year
of age, if signs of systemic toxicity are present, if an adequate examination cannot be carried out, or if an immunocompromising condition
(e.g., malignancy, neutropenia, or neutrophil functional defects) is
present. Aspirates from the site of inflammation, skin biopsy, and blood
cultures allow identification of the causal organism in approximately
25% of cases of cellulitis. Yield of the causative organism is approximately 30% when the site of origin of the cellulitis is apparent, such
as an abrasion or ulcer. An aspirate taken from the point of maximum
inflammation yields the causal organism more often than a leading-­
edge aspirate. Lack of success in isolating an organism stems primarily
from the low number of organisms present within the lesion. Ultrasonography can be performed if an associated subcutaneous abscess
is suspected and may be helpful in cases where there is uncertainty if
there a drainable fluid collection is present.
The differential diagnosis includes an exuberant immune-­allergic
reaction to insect bites, particularly mosquito bites (Skeeter syndromes) (see Chapter 187). Skeeter syndrome is characterized by
swelling disproportionate to erythema; there is pruritus but usually no
tenderness. In addition, cold panniculitis may appear as an erythematous, but usually nontender, swelling after exposure to cold, such as
sledding or eating a cold Popsicle (see Chapter 701.1).

Treatment

Empirical antibiotic therapy for cellulitis and the initial route of administration should be guided by the age and immune status of the patient,
history of the illness, and location and severity of the cellulitis.
Neonates should receive an intravenous antibiotic with a β-­
lactamase–stable antistaphylococcal antibiotic such as nafcillin,
cefazolin, or vancomycin, and an aminoglycoside such as gentamicin
or a third-­generation cephalosporin such as cefotaxime.
In infants and children older than 2 months with mild to moderate infections, particularly if fever, lymphadenopathy, and other constitutional signs are absent, treatment of cellulitis may be initiated
orally on an outpatient basis with a penicillinase-­resistant penicillin
such as dicloxacillin or a first-­generation cephalosporin such as cephalexin or, if MRSA is suspected, with clindamycin. Some recommend
trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole, although it does not provide ideal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4152 Part XXIX u The Skin
coverage against S. pyogenes, a potential cause of cellulitis without
abscess.
Intravenous antibiotics may be necessary if improvement is not
noted or the disease progresses significantly in the first 24-­48 hours
of therapy. Infants and children older than 2 months with signs of systemic infection, including fever, lymphadenopathy, or constitutional
signs, also require hospitalization and treatment with intravenous antibiotics effective against S. pyogenes and S. aureus, such as clindamycin
or a first-­generation cephalosporin (cefazolin). If the child is severely
ill or toxic appearing, consideration should be given to the addition of
clindamycin or vancomycin if these antibiotics were not started initially. Other agents for complicated skin and skin structure infections
caused by MRSA or S. pyogenes have been approved by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) in adults, including dalbavancin (IV
given once weekly), ceftaroline (IV), telavancin (IV), linezolid (oral or
IV), tedizolid (oral or IV), and oritavancin (IV). Dalbavancin also provides activity against vancomycin-­resistant enterococci.
In unimmunized patients, antibiotic treatment may include a
third-­generation cephalosporin (cefepime, ceftriaxone, or, if available,
cefotaxime) or a β-­lactam/β-­lactamase inhibitor combination (e.g.,
ampicillin-­sulbactam), which provides coverage for H. influenzae type
b and Streptococcus pneumoniae.
Once the erythema, warmth, edema, and fever have decreased significantly, a 5-­to 7-­day total course of treatment may be completed
on an outpatient basis, though treatment should be extended if the
infection has not substantially improved with this period. Elevation of
an affected limb, particularly early in the course of therapy, may help
reduce swelling and pain. If present, a subcutaneous abscess should be
drained.

NECROTIZING FASCIITIS
Etiology

Necrotizing fasciitis is a subcutaneous tissue infection that involves the
deep layer of superficial fascia but may spare adjacent epidermis, deep
fascia, and muscle.
Relatively few organisms possess sufficient virulence to cause necrotizing fasciitis when acting alone. Most (55–75%) cases of necrotizing
fasciitis are polymicrobial (synergistic or type 1 necrotizing fasciitis),
with an average of four different organisms isolated. The organisms
most commonly isolated in polymicrobial necrotizing fasciitis are S.
aureus, streptococcal species, Klebsiella species, E. coli, and anaerobic
bacteria.
The rest of the cases (type 2) and the most fulminant infections,
associated with toxic shock syndrome and a high case-­fatality rate, are
usually caused by S. pyogenes (group A streptococcus) (see Chapter
229). Streptococcal necrotizing fasciitis may occur in the absence of
toxic shock-­like syndrome and is potentially fatal and associated with
substantial morbidity. Necrotizing fasciitis can occasionally be caused
by S. aureus; C. perfringens; Clostridium septicum; P. aeruginosa; Vibrio
spp., particularly V. vulnificus; and fungi of the order Mucorales, particularly Rhizopus spp., Mucor spp., and Absidia spp. Necrotizing fasciitis has also been reported on rare occasions to result from nongroup
A streptococci such as group B, C, F, or G streptococci; S. pneumoniae;
or H. influenzae type b.
Infections caused by any organism or combination of organisms
cannot be distinguished clinically from one another, although development of crepitus signals the presence of gas-­forming organisms: Clostridium spp. or gram-­negative bacilli such as E. coli, Klebsiella, Proteus,
or Aeromonas.

Clinical Manifestations

Necrotizing fasciitis may occur anywhere on the body but most often on
the extremities or areas of trauma. The incidence of necrotizing fasciitis
is highest in hosts with systemic or local tissue immunocompromise,
such as those with diabetes mellitus, neoplasia, or peripheral vascular
disease, and those who have recently undergone surgery, who use IV
drugs, or who are undergoing immunosuppressive treatment, particularly with corticosteroids. The infection can also occur in healthy individuals after minor puncture wounds, abrasions, or lacerations; blunt

trauma; surgical procedures, particularly of the abdomen, gastrointestinal or genitourinary tracts, or the perineum; or hypodermic needle
injection.
There is a resurgence of fulminant necrotizing soft tissue infections
caused by S. pyogenes, which may occur in previously healthy individuals. Streptococcal necrotizing fasciitis is classically located on an
extremity. There may be a history of recent trauma to or operation in
the area. Necrotizing fasciitis due to S. pyogenes may also occur after
superinfection of varicella lesions. Children with this disease have
tended to display onset, recrudescence, or persistence of high fever
and signs of toxicity after the third or fourth day of varicella. Common
predisposing conditions in neonates are omphalitis and balanitis after
circumcision.
Necrotizing fasciitis begins with acute onset of local, and at times
tense, edema with erythema, tenderness, and heat. Fever is usually
present, and pain, tenderness, and constitutional signs are disproportionate to cutaneous signs, especially with involvement of fascia and
muscle. Tachycardia is out of proportion to the fever. Lymphangitis
and lymphadenitis may or may not be present. The infection advances
along the superficial fascial plane, and initially there may be few cutaneous signs to herald the serious nature and extent of the subcutaneous tissue necrosis that is occurring. Skin changes may appear over
24-­48 hours as nutrient vessels are thrombosed and cutaneous ischemia develops. Early clinical findings include ill-­defined cutaneous
erythema and edema that extends beyond the area of erythema. There
is intense pain on movement. Additional signs include formation of bullae filled initially with straw-­colored and later bluish to hemorrhagic
fluid and darkening of affected tissues from red to purple to blue. Skin
anesthesia and, finally, frank tissue gangrene and slough develop owing
to the ischemia and necrosis. Vesiculation or bulla formation, ecchymoses, crepitus, anesthesia, and necrosis are ominous signs indicative
of advanced disease. Children with varicella lesions may initially show
no cutaneous signs of superinfection with invasive S. pyogenes, such
as erythema or swelling. Significant systemic toxicity may accompany
necrotizing fasciitis, including shock, organ failure, and death. Advance
of the infection in this setting can be rapid, progressing to death within
hours. Patients with involvement of the superficial or deep fascia and
muscle tend to be more acutely and systemically ill and have more rapidly advancing disease than those with infection confined solely to subcutaneous tissues above the fascia. There is often hyponatremia (<135
mg/L), an elevated CRP (>20 mg/L), and extreme leukocytosis. In an
extremity, compartment syndrome may develop, manifesting as tight
edema, pain on motion, and loss of distal sensation and pulses; this is a
surgical emergency (see Chapter 80).

Diagnosis

Definitive diagnosis of necrotizing fasciitis is made by surgical exploration, which should be undertaken as soon as the diagnosis is suspected.
Necrotic fascia and subcutaneous tissue are gray and offer little resistance to blunt probing. Although MRI aids in delineating the extent
and tissue planes of involvement, these procedures should not delay
surgical intervention. Frozen-­
section incisional biopsy specimens
obtained early in the course of the infection can aid management by
decreasing the time to diagnosis and helping to establish the margins
of involvement. Gram staining of tissue can be particularly useful if
chains of gram-­positive cocci, indicative of infection with S. pyogenes,
are seen.

Treatment

Early supportive care, surgical debridement, and parenteral antibiotic
administration are mandatory for necrotizing fasciitis. All devitalized
tissue should be removed to freely bleeding edges, and repeat exploration is generally indicated within 24-­36 hours to confirm that no
necrotic tissue remains. This procedure may need to be repeated on
several occasions until devitalized tissue has ceased to form. Meticulous daily wound care is also paramount.
Parenteral antibiotic therapy should be initiated as soon as possible
with broad-­spectrum agents against all potential pathogens. Initial
empirical therapy should be instituted with vancomycin, linezolid,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 706 u Cutaneous Bacterial Infections
or daptomycin to cover gram-­positive organisms and piperacillin-­
tazobactam to cover gram-­negative organisms. An alternative is to
add ceftriaxone with metronidazole to cover mixed aerobic-­anaerobic
organisms. Definitive therapy should then be based on sensitivity of
isolated organisms. Penicillin with clindamycin is indicated for necrotizing fasciitis caused by either group A streptococcus or Clostridium
spp. For group A streptococcus infections, clindamycin is administered
until the patient is hemodynamically stable and no longer requires surgical debridement. Unlike penicillin, the effectiveness of clindamycin
is not influenced by the infectious burden or bacterial stage of growth;
thus its addition early in the course of infection may lead to more rapid
bacterial killing. Doxycycline plus either ciprofloxacin or ceftazidime
is recommended for V. vulnificus necrotizing fasciitis. Duration of
therapy for necrotizing fasciitis depends on the course of the illness.
Antibiotics are generally continued for at least 5 days after signs and
symptoms of local signs and symptoms have resolved; the typical duration of therapy is 4 weeks. Many centers employ hyperbaric oxygen
therapy, although it should not delay resuscitation of shock or surgical
debridement.

4153

to gentle shear force (Nikolsky sign; Fig. 706.2). As large sheets of epidermis peel away, moist, glistening, denuded areas become apparent,
initially in the flexures and subsequently over much of the body surface (Fig. 706.3). This development may lead to secondary cutaneous
infection, sepsis, and fluid and electrolyte disturbances. The desquamative phase begins after 2-­5 days of cutaneous erythema; healing occurs
without scarring in 10-­14 days. Patients may have pharyngitis, conjunctivitis, and superficial erosions of the lips, but intraoral mucosal
surfaces are spared. Although some patients appear ill, many are reasonably comfortable except for the marked skin tenderness.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

A presumed forme fruste of the disease manifests as diffuse, scarlatiniform, tender erythroderma that is accentuated in the flexural areas
but does not progress to blister formation. In patients with this form,
Nikolsky sign may be absent. Although the exanthem is similar to that
of streptococcal scarlet fever, strawberry tongue and palatal petechiae
are absent. Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome may be mistaken
for a number of other blistering and exfoliating disorders, including

Prognosis

The combined case-­fatality rate among children and adults with necrotizing fasciitis and syndrome due to polymicrobial infection or S.
pyogenes has been as high as 60%. However, death is less common in
children and in cases not complicated by toxic shock–like syndrome.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

706.3 Staphylococcal Scalded Skin
Syndrome (Ritter Disease)
Stephen R. Humphrey

ETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome is caused predominantly by
phage group 2 staphylococci, particularly strains 71 and 55, which
are present at localized sites of infection. Foci of infection include the
nasopharynx and, less commonly, the umbilicus, urinary tract, a superficial abrasion, conjunctivae, and blood. The clinical manifestations of
staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome are mediated by hematogenous
spread in the absence of specific antitoxin antibody of staphylococcal
epidermolytic or exfoliative toxins A or B. The toxins have reproduced
the disease in both animal models and human volunteers. Decreased
renal clearance of the toxins may account for the fact that the disease is
most common in infants and young children, as well as a lack of protection from antitoxin antibodies. Epidermolytic toxin A is heat stable
and is encoded by bacterial chromosomal genes. Epidermolytic toxin
B is heat labile and is encoded on a 37.5-­kb plasmid. The site of blister cleavage is subcorneal. The epidermolytic toxins produce the split
by binding to and cleaving desmoglein 1. Intact bullae are consistently
sterile, unlike those of bullous impetigo, but culture specimens should
be obtained from all suspected sites of localized infection and from the
blood to identify the source for elaboration of the epidermolytic toxins.

Fig. 706.2 Nikolsky sign. With slight thumb pressure the skin wrinkles, slides laterally, and separates from the dermis. (From Habif TP, ed.
Clinical Dermatology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2004.)

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome, which occurs predominantly
in infants and children younger than 5 years of age, includes a range
of disease from localized bullous impetigo to generalized cutaneous
involvement with systemic illness. Onset of the rash may be preceded
by malaise, fever, irritability, and exquisite tenderness of the skin. Scarlatiniform erythema develops diffusely and is accentuated in flexural
and periorificial areas. The conjunctivae are inflamed and occasionally
become purulent. The brightly erythematous skin may rapidly acquire
a wrinkled appearance, and in severe cases, sterile, flaccid blisters and
erosions develop diffusely. Circumoral erythema is characteristically
prominent, as is radial crusting and fissuring around the eyes, mouth,
and nose. At this stage, areas of the epidermis may separate in response

Fig. 706.3 Infant with staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4154 Part XXIX u The Skin
bullous impetigo, epidermolysis bullosa, epidermolytic hyperkeratosis,
pemphigus, drug eruption, erythema multiforme, and drug-­induced
toxic epidermal necrolysis. Toxic epidermal necrolysis can often be
distinguished by a history of drug ingestion, the presence of Nikolsky
sign only at sites of erythema, the absence of perioral crusting, full-­
thickness epidermal necrosis, and a blister cleavage plane in the lowermost epidermis.

HISTOLOGY

A subcorneal, granular layer split can be identified on skin biopsy.
Absence of an inflammatory infiltrate is characteristic. Histology is
identical to that seen in pemphigus foliaceus, bullous impetigo, and
subcorneal pustular dermatosis.

TREATMENT

Systemic therapy, given either orally in cases of localized involvement
or parenterally with a semisynthetic antistaphylococcal penicillin (e.g.,
nafcillin), first-­generation cephalosporin (e.g., cefazolin), clindamycin, or vancomycin if MRSA is considered, should be prescribed.
Clindamycin is typically used in addition to other agents to inhibit
bacterial protein (toxin) synthesis; however, it may not provide any
additional coverage compared with cephalosporins unless there is high
MRSA community prevalence. The skin should be gently moistened
and cleansed. Application of an emollient provides lubrication and
decreases discomfort. Topical antibiotics are unnecessary. In neonates,
or in infants or children with severe infection, hospitalization is mandatory, with attention to fluid and electrolyte management, infection
control measures, pain management, and meticulous wound care with
contact isolation. In particularly severe disease, care in an intensive
care or burn unit is required. Recovery is usually rapid, but complications, such as excessive fluid loss, electrolyte imbalance, faulty temperature regulation, pneumonia, septicemia, and cellulitis, may cause
increased morbidity.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

706.4 Ecthyma
Stephen R. Humphrey
See also Chapters 227, 229, and 251.
Ecthyma resembles nonbullous impetigo in onset and appearance
but gradually evolves into a deeper, more chronic infection. The initial
lesion is a vesicle or vesicular pustule with an erythematous base that
erodes through the epidermis into the dermis to form an ulcer with
elevated margins. The ulcer becomes obscured by a dry, heaped-­up,
tightly adherent crust (Fig. 706.4) that contributes to the persistence of
the infection and scar formation. Lesions may be spread by autoinoculation, may be as large as 4 cm, and occur most frequently on the legs.
Predisposing factors include the presence of pruritic lesions, such as
insect bites, scabies, or pediculosis, that are subject to frequent scratching; poor hygiene; and malnutrition. Complications include lymphangitis, cellulitis, and, rarely, poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis. The
causative agent is usually GABHS; S. aureus is also cultured from most
lesions but is probably a secondary pathogen. Crusts should be softened with warm compresses and removed. Systemic antibiotic therapy,
as for impetigo, is indicated; almost all lesions are responsive to treatment with penicillin.
Ecthyma gangrenosum is a necrotic ulcer covered with a gray-­black
eschar. It is usually a sign of P. aeruginosa infection, most often occurring in immunosuppressed patients. Neutropenia is a risk factor for
ecthyma gangrenosum, including variants such as chronic, cyclic, and
transient neutropenia. Ecthyma gangrenosum occurs in up to 6% of
patients with systemic P. aeruginosa infection but can also occur as
a primary cutaneous infection by inoculation. The lesion begins as a
red or purpuric macule that vesiculates and then ulcerates. There is
a surrounding rim of pink to violaceous skin. The punched-­out ulcer
develops raised edges with a dense, black, depressed, crusted center.

Fig. 706.4 Dry, tightly adherent crust in ecthyma.
Lesions may be single or multiple. Patients with bacteremia commonly
have lesions in apocrine areas. Clinically similar lesions may also
develop as a result of infection with other agents, such as S. aureus,
A. hydrophila, Enterobacter spp., Proteus spp., Burkholderia cepacia,
Serratia marcescens, Aspergillus spp., Mucorales, E. coli, and Candida
spp. There is bacterial invasion of the adventitia and media of dermal
veins but not arteries. The intima and lumina are spared. Blood and
skin biopsy specimens for culture should be obtained, and empirical
broad-­spectrum, systemic therapy that includes coverage for P. aeruginosa (e.g., antipseudomonal penicillin or cephalosporin and an aminoglycoside) should be initiated as soon as possible.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

706.5 Other Cutaneous Bacterial Infections
Stephen R. Humphrey

BLASTOMYCOSIS-­LIKE PYODERMA (PYODERMA
VEGETANS)

Blastomycosis-­like pyoderma is an exuberant cutaneous reaction to
bacterial infection that occurs primarily in children who are malnourished and immunosuppressed. The organisms most commonly isolated
from lesions are S. aureus and group A streptococcus, but several other
organisms have been associated with these lesions, including P. aeruginosa, Proteus mirabilis, diphtheroids, Bacillus spp., and C. perfringens.
Crusted, hyperplastic plaques on the extremities are characteristic,
sometimes forming from the coalescence of many pinpoint, purulent,
crusted abscesses (Fig. 706.5). Ulceration and sinus tract formation
may develop, and additional lesions may appear at sites distant from
the site of inoculation. Regional lymphadenopathy is common, but
fever is not. Histopathologic examination reveals pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia and microabscesses composed of neutrophils and/or
eosinophils. Giant cells are usually lacking. The differential diagnosis
includes deep fungal infection, particularly blastomycosis (Fig. 706.6)
and tuberculous and atypical mycobacterial infection. Underlying
immunodeficiency should be ruled out, and the selection of antibiotics should be guided by susceptibility testing because the response to
antibiotics is often poor.

BLISTERING DISTAL DACTYLITIS

Blistering distal dactylitis is a superficial blistering infection of the
volar fat pad on the distal portion of the finger or thumb that typically
affects infants and young children (Fig. 706.7). More than one finger
may be involved, as may the volar surfaces of the proximal phalanges,
palms, and toes. Blisters are filled with a watery purulent fluid; polymorphonuclear leukocytes and gram-­positive cocci are identified on
Gram stain. Patients commonly have no preceding history of trauma,
and systemic symptoms are generally absent. Poststreptococcal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 706 u Cutaneous Bacterial Infections

4155

Fig. 706.5 Large vegetating lesion of pyoderma vegetans.

Fig. 706.8 Perianal streptococcal dermatitis. Bright red erythema

with a moist, tender surface. (From Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds. Hurwitz
Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2006,
Fig. 17.38.)

of an antibiotic effective against group A streptococcus and S. aureus
(e.g., amoxicillin-­clavulanate, clindamycin, cephalexin); patients may
require initial IV antibiotic therapy.

PERIANAL INFECTIOUS DERMATITIS

Fig. 706.6 Cutaneous blastomycosis. Verrucous, crusted, erythematous plaque on the chin in a 15-­yr-­old boy with respiratory symptoms
and bone pain. (From Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2006, Fig. 14.13.)

Fig. 706.7 Blistering dactylitis. Edema and a tense bulla on the thumb
of this 7-­yr-­old girl. Culture of the blister fluid yielded Staphylococcus
aureus rather than the more commonly seen group A β-­hemolytic streptococcus. (From Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric
Dermatology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2006, Fig. 14.14.)

glomerulonephritis has not occurred after blistering distal dactylitis.
The infection is caused most commonly by group A streptococcus but
has also occurred as a result of infection with S. aureus. If left untreated,
blisters may continue to enlarge and extend to the paronychial area.
The infection responds to incision and drainage and a 10-­day course

Perianal infectious dermatitis presents most commonly in boys (70%
of cases) between the ages of 6 months and 10 years as perianal dermatitis (90% of cases) and pruritus (80% of cases; Fig. 706.8). The
incidence of perianal infectious dermatitis is not known precisely but
ranges from 1 in 2,000 to 1 in 218 patient visits. When GABHS is suspected, it is often referred to as perianal streptococcal dermatitis. The
rash is superficial, erythematous, well marginated, nonindurated, and
confluent from the anus outward. Acutely (<6 weeks), the rash tends to
be bright red, moist, and tender to touch. At this stage, a white pseudomembrane may be present. As the rash becomes more chronic, the
perianal eruption may consist of painful fissures, a dried mucoid discharge, or psoriasiform plaques with yellow peripheral crust. In girls,
the perianal rash may be associated with vulvovaginitis. In boys, the
penis may be involved. Approximately 50% of patients have rectal pain,
most commonly described as burning inside the anus during defecation, and 33% have blood-­streaked stools. Fecal retention is a frequent
behavioral response to the infection. Patients also have presented with
guttate psoriasis. Although local induration or edema may occur, constitutional symptoms, such as fever, headache, and malaise, are absent,
suggesting that subcutaneous involvement, as in cellulitis, is absent.
Familial spread of perianal infectious dermatitis is common, particularly when family members bathe together or use the same water.
Perianal infectious dermatitis is usually caused by GABHS, but it
may also be caused by S. aureus. The index case and family members
should undergo culture; follow-­up cultures to document bacteriologic
cure after a course of treatment are recommended.
The differential diagnosis of perianal infectious dermatitis includes
psoriasis, seborrheic dermatitis, candidiasis, pinworm infestation, sexual abuse, and inflammatory bowel disease.
For GABHS perianal infectious dermatitis, treatment with a 7-­day
course of cefuroxime (20 mg/kg/day in two divided doses) is superior
to treatment with penicillin. Concomitant topical mupirocin ointment
two to three times a day also may be used. If S. aureus is cultured, treatment should be based on sensitivities.

ERYSIPELAS

See Chapter 229.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4156 Part XXIX u The Skin
weeks, often leaving postinflammatory hyperpigmentation. Consideration should be given to the use of systemic antibiotics (ciprofloxacin)
in adolescent patients with constitutional symptoms. Immunocompromised children are susceptible to complications of Pseudomonas folliculitis (cellulitis) and should avoid hot tubs.

ABSCESSES AND FURUNCLES
Etiology

Fig. 706.9 Folliculitis. Multiple follicular pustules.

FOLLICULITIS

Folliculitis, or superficial infection of the hair follicle, is most often
caused by S. aureus. The lesions are typically small, discrete, dome-­
shaped pustules with an erythematous base, located at the ostium
of the pilosebaceous canals (Fig. 706.9). Hair growth is unimpaired,
and the lesions heal without scarring. Favored sites include the scalp,
buttocks, and extremities. Poor hygiene, maceration, drainage from
wounds and abscesses, and shaving of the legs can be provocative factors. Folliculitis can also occur as a result of tar therapy or occlusive
wraps. The moist environment encourages bacterial proliferation. In
HIV-­infected patients, S. aureus may produce confluent erythematous
patches with satellite pustules in intertriginous areas and violaceous
plaques composed of superficial follicular pustules in the scalp, axillae, or groin. The differential diagnosis includes Candida, which may
cause satellite follicular papules and pustules surrounding erythematous patches of intertrigo (particularly in groin/buttocks), and Malassezia furfur, which produces 2-­to 3-­mm, pruritic, erythematous,
perifollicular papules and pustules on the back, chest, and extremities,
particularly in patients who have diabetes mellitus or are taking corticosteroids or antibiotics. Diagnosis is made by examining potassium
hydroxide–treated scrapings from lesions. Detection of Malassezia
may require a skin biopsy, demonstrating clusters of yeast and short,
branching hyphae (“macaroni and meatballs”) in widened follicular
ostia mixed with keratinous debris.
Topical antibiotic therapy (e.g., clindamycin 1% lotion or solution
twice a day) is usually all that is needed for mild cases, but more severe
cases may require the use of a systemic antibiotic such as dicloxacillin or cephalexin. Bacterial culture should be performed in treatment-­
resistant cases. In chronic recurrent folliculitis, daily application of
a benzoyl peroxide 5% gel or wash may facilitate resolution. Dilute
bleach baths may also be effective in reducing recurrence.
Folliculitis barbae (sycosis barbae) is a deeper, more severe recurrent inflammatory form of folliculitis caused by S. aureus that involves
the entire depth of the follicle. Erythematous follicular papules and
pustules develop on the chin, upper lip, and angle of the jaw, primarily
in young Black males. Papules may coalesce into plaques, and healing
may occur with scarring. Affected individuals are frequently found to
be S. aureus carriers. Treatment with warm saline compresses and topical antibiotics, such as mupirocin, generally clear the infection. More
extensive, recalcitrant cases may require therapy with β-­lactamase–
resistant systemic antibiotics for several weeks and elimination of S.
aureus from the sites of carriage.
Pseudomonal folliculitis (hot tub folliculitis) is attributable to P.
aeruginosa, predominantly serotype O-­11. It occurs after exposure to
poorly chlorinated hot tubs/whirlpools and swimming pools and to
a contaminated water slide or loofah sponge. The lesions are pruritic
papules and pustules or deeply erythematous to violaceous nodules
that develop 8-­48 hours after exposure and are most dense in areas
covered by a bathing suit (Fig. 685.10). Patients occasionally experience fever, malaise, and lymphadenopathy. The organism is readily
cultured from pus. The eruption usually resolves spontaneously in 1-­2

The causative agent in furuncles (“boils”) and carbuncles is usually S.
aureus, which penetrates abraded perifollicular skin. Furuncles are
nodules that develop from a single follicle, whereas carbuncles are a
coalescence of multiple follicles and are more extensive. Conditions
predisposing to furuncle formation include obesity, hyperhidrosis,
maceration, friction, and preexisting dermatitis. Furunculosis is also
more common in individuals with low serum iron levels, diabetes, malnutrition, HIV infection, or other immunodeficiency states. Recurrent
furunculosis is frequently associated with carriage of S. aureus in the
nares, axillae, or perineum or close contact with someone such as a
family member who is a carrier. Other bacteria or fungi may occasionally cause furuncles or carbuncles.
Community-­acquired MRSA abscesses can also complicate
folliculitis-­related carbuncles or are acquired from penetrating cutaneous trauma unrelated to folliculitis. Community-­acquired MRSA
infections commonly affect children and young adults, especially athletes, where spread of the infection is enhanced by skin-­to-­skin contact.
Infection can also be spread by crowding conditions, shared personal
hygiene items, and a compromised skin barrier. They may occur in any
location; however, they are most common on the lower abdomen, buttocks, and legs.

Clinical Manifestations

This follicular lesion may originate from a preceding folliculitis or may
arise initially as a deep-­seated, tender, erythematous, perifollicular
nodule. Although lesions are initially indurated, central necrosis and
suppuration follow, leading to rupture and discharge of a central core
of necrotic tissue and destruction of the follicle (Fig. 706.11). Healing
occurs with scar formation. Sites of predilection are the hair-­bearing
areas on the face, neck, axillae, buttocks, and groin. Pain may be intense
if the lesion is situated in an area where the skin is relatively fixed, such
as in the external auditory canal or over the nasal cartilages. Patients
with furuncles usually have no constitutional symptoms; bacteremia
may occasionally ensue. Rarely, lesions on the upper lip or cheek may
lead to cavernous sinus thrombosis. Infection of a group of contiguous
follicles, with multiple drainage points, accompanied by inflammatory
changes in surrounding connective tissue is a carbuncle. Carbuncles
may be accompanied by fever, leukocytosis, and bacteremia. Hidradenitis suppurativa should be considered in individuals who have recurrent abscesses.

Treatment

Treatment for furuncle and carbuncle includes regular bathing with
antimicrobial soaps (chlorhexidine) and wearing of loose-­fitting clothing to minimize predisposing factors for furuncle formation. Frequent
application of a hot, moist compress may facilitate the drainage of
lesions. Large lesions should be drained by a small incision. Carbuncles
and large or numerous furuncles should be treated with systemic antibiotics chosen based on culture and sensitivity testing results.
Abscesses are treated with incision and drainage and oral antibiotics for 7-­10 days. Antibiotics with coverage against MRSA are recommended and commonly include oral clindamycin (10-­30 mg/kg/day
in divided doses) or trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole (8-­10 mg trimethoprim/kg/day in divided doses every 12 hours). Children older than
8 years may receive doxycycline. To reduce colonization and hence
reinfection in children with recurrent infections, mupirocin intranasally (twice daily) and either chlorhexidine (in lieu of soap during
showers) or diluted bleach baths (1 teaspoon per gallon of water or 1/4
cup per 1/4 tub [∼13 gallons] of water) once daily for 5 days in patients
and in family members has been recommended. Recolonization often
occurs, typically within 3 months of the decolonization attempt.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 706 u Cutaneous Bacterial Infections

Fig. 706.10 Papules and pustules in hot tub folliculitis.

4157

Fig. 706.12 Superficial erosions of the horny layer in pitted keratolysis.
within 20 hours of Wood lamp examination may remove the water-­
soluble porphyrins. Staining of skin scrapings with methylene blue or
Gram stain reveals the pleomorphic, filamentous coccobacillary forms.
Effective treatment can be achieved with topical erythromycin,
clindamycin, miconazole, or a 10-­to 14-­day course of oral erythromycin or an oral tetracycline (in those older than 8 years of age).

ERYSIPELOID

Fig. 706.11 Rupture and discharge of pus in a furuncle.

PITTED KERATOLYSIS

Pitted keratolysis occurs most frequently in humid tropical and subtropical climates, particularly in individuals whose feet are moist for
prolonged periods, for example, as a result of hyperhidrosis, prolonged
wearing of boots, or immersion in water. It occurs most commonly in
young males from early adolescence to the late 20s. The lesions consist of 1-­to 7-­mm, irregularly shaped, superficial erosions of the horny
layer on the soles, particularly at weight-­bearing sites (Fig. 706.12).
Brownish discoloration of involved areas may be apparent. A rare
variant manifests as thinned, erythematous to violaceous plaques in
addition to the typical pitted lesions. The condition is frequently malodorous and is painful in approximately 50% of cases. The most likely
etiologic agent is Corynebacterium (Kytococcus) sedentarius. Treatment of hyperhidrosis is mandatory with prescription-­strength aluminum chloride products or 40% formaldehyde in petrolatum ointment.
Avoidance of moisture and maceration produces slow, spontaneous
resolution of the infection. Topical or systemic erythromycin and topical imidazole creams are standard therapy.

ERYTHRASMA

Erythrasma is a benign chronic superficial infection caused by Corynebacterium minutissimum. Predisposing factors include heat, humidity, obesity, skin maceration, diabetes mellitus, and poor hygiene.
Approximately 20% of affected patients have involvement of the toe
webs. Other frequently affected sites are moist, intertriginous areas
such as the groin and axillae. The inframammary and perianal regions
are occasionally involved. Sharply demarcated, irregularly bordered,
slightly scaly, brownish red patches are characteristic of the disease.
Mild pruritus is the only constant symptom. C. minutissimum is a complex of related organisms that produce porphyrins that fluoresce brilliant coral red under ultraviolet light. The diagnosis is readily made,
and erythrasma is differentiated from dermatophyte infection and
from tinea versicolor on Wood lamp examination. However, bathing

A rare cutaneous infection, erysipeloid is caused by inoculation of
E. rhusiopathiae from handling contaminated animals, birds, fish, or
their products. The localized cutaneous form is most common, characterized by well-­demarcated, diamond-­shaped, erythematous to violaceous patches at sites of inoculation. Local symptoms are generally
not severe, constitutional symptoms are rare, and the lesions resolve
spontaneously after weeks but can recur at the same site or develop
elsewhere weeks to months later. The diffuse cutaneous form manifests
as lesions at several areas of the body in addition to the site of inoculation. It is also self-­limited. The systemic form, caused by hematogenous
spread, is accompanied by constitutional symptoms and may include
endocarditis, septic arthritis, cerebral infarct and abscess, meningitis,
and pulmonary effusion. Diagnosis is confirmed by skin biopsy, which
reveals the gram-­positive organisms, and culture. The treatment of
choice for localized cutaneous infection is oral penicillin for 7 days;
ciprofloxacin or a combination of erythromycin and rifampin may be
used for penicillin-­allergic patients. Severe diffuse cutaneous or systemic infection may require parenteral penicillin or ceftriaxone.

TUBERCULOSIS OF THE SKIN

See Chapters 261 and 263.
Cutaneous tuberculosis infection occurs worldwide, particularly in
association with HIV infection, malnutrition, and poor sanitary conditions. Primary cutaneous tuberculosis is rare in the United States.
Cutaneous disease is caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Mycobacterium bovis, and, occasionally, by the bacillus Calmette-­Guérin
(BCG), an attenuated vaccine form of M. bovis. The manifestations
caused by a given organism are indistinguishable from one another.
After invasion of the skin, mycobacteria either multiply intracellularly
within macrophages, leading to progressive disease, or are controlled
by the host immune reaction.
Primary cutaneous tuberculosis (tuberculous chancre) results when
M. tuberculosis or M. bovis gains access to the skin or mucous membranes through trauma in a previously uninfected individual without
immunity to the organism. Sites of predilection are the face, lower
extremities, and genitals. The initial lesion develops 2-­4 weeks after
introduction of the organism into the damaged tissue. A red-­brown
papule gradually enlarges to form a shallow, firm, sharply demarcated
ulcer. Satellite abscesses may be present. Some lesions acquire a crust
resembling impetigo, and others become heaped up and verrucous at
the margins. The primary lesion can also manifest as a painless ulcer
on the conjunctiva, gingiva, or palate and occasionally as a painless
acute paronychia. Painless regional adenopathy may appear several

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4158 Part XXIX u The Skin
weeks after the development of the primary lesion and may be accompanied by lymphangitis, lymphadenitis, or perforation of the skin surface, forming scrofuloderma. Untreated lesions heal with scarring
within 12 months but may reactivate, may form lupus vulgaris (sharply
defined red-­brown nodules with a gelatinous consistency that represent progressive infection), or, rarely, may progress to the acute miliary
form. Therefore antituberculous therapy is indicated (see Chapter 261).
M. tuberculosis or M. bovis can be cultured from the skin lesion and
local lymph nodes, but acid-­fast staining of histologic sections, particularly of a well-­controlled infection, often does not reveal the organism.
The differential diagnosis is broad, including a syphilitic chancre; deep
fungal or atypical mycobacterial infection; leprosy; tularemia; cat-­scratch
disease; sporotrichosis; nocardiosis; leishmaniasis; reaction to foreign
substances such as zirconium, beryllium, silk or nylon sutures, talc, and
starch; papular acne rosacea; and lupus miliaris disseminatus faciei.
Scrofuloderma results from enlargement, cold abscess formation,
and breakdown of a lymph node, most frequently in a cervical chain,
with extension to the overlying skin from underlying foci of tuberculous infection. Linear or serpiginous ulcers and dissecting fistulas and
subcutaneous tracts studded with soft nodules may develop. Spontaneous healing may take years, eventuating in cordlike keloid scars.
Lupus vulgaris may also develop. Lesions may also originate from an
underlying infected joint, tendon, bone, or epididymis. The differential diagnosis includes syphilitic gumma, deep fungal infections, actinomycosis, and hidradenitis suppurativa. The course is indolent, and
constitutional symptoms are typically absent. Antituberculous therapy
is indicated (see Chapter 261).
Direct cutaneous inoculation of the tubercle bacillus into a previously infected individual with a moderate to high degree of immunity
initially produces a small papule with surrounding inflammation.
Tuberculosis verrucosa cutis (warty tuberculosis) forms when the
papule becomes hyperkeratotic and warty, and several adjacent papules coalesce or a single papule expands peripherally to form a brownish red to violaceous, exudative, crusted verrucous plaque. Irregular
extension of the margins of the plaque produces a serpiginous border.
Children have the lesions most commonly on the lower extremities
after trauma and contact with infected material such as sputum or soil.
Regional lymph nodes are involved only rarely. Spontaneous healing
with atrophic scarring takes place over months to years. Healing is also
gradual with antituberculous therapy.
Lupus vulgaris is a rare, chronic, progressive form of cutaneous
tuberculosis that develops in individuals with a moderate to high
degree of tuberculin sensitivity induced by previous infection. The
incidence is greater in cool, moist climates, particularly in females.
Lupus vulgaris develops as a result of direct extension from underlying joints or lymph nodes; through lymphatic or hematogenous
spread; or, rarely, by cutaneous inoculation with the BCG vaccine. It
most commonly follows cervical adenitis or pulmonary tuberculosis.
Approximately 33% of cases are preceded by scrofuloderma, and 90%
of cases manifest on the head and neck, most commonly on the nose
or cheek. Involvement of the trunk is uncommon. A typical solitary
lesion consists of a soft, brownish red papule that has an apple-­jelly
color when examined by diascopy. Peripheral expansion of the papule
or, occasionally, the coalescence of several papules forms an irregular
lesion of variable size and form. One or several lesions may develop,
including nodules or plaques that are flat and serpiginous, hypertrophic and verrucous, or edematous in appearance. Spontaneous healing
occurs centrally, and lesions characteristically reappear within the area
of atrophy. Chronicity is characteristic, and persistence and progression of plaques over many years are common. Lymphadenitis is present
in 40% of those with lupus vulgaris, and 10–20% have infection of the
lungs, bones, or joints. Extensive deformities may be caused by vegetative masses and ulceration involving the nasal, buccal, or conjunctival
mucosa; the palate; the gingiva; or the oropharynx. Squamous cell carcinoma, with a relatively high metastatic potential, may develop, usually after several years of the disease. After a temporary impairment in
immunity, particularly after measles infection (lupus exanthematicus),
multiple lesions may form at distant sites as a result of hematogenous
spread from a latent focus of infection. The histopathology reveals a

tuberculoid granuloma without caseation; organisms are extremely difficult to demonstrate. The differential diagnosis includes sarcoidosis,
atypical mycobacterial infection, blastomycosis, chromoblastomycosis,
actinomycosis, leishmaniasis, tertiary syphilis, leprosy, hypertrophic
lichen planus, psoriasis, lupus erythematosus, lymphocytoma, and
Bowen disease. Small lesions can be excised. Antituberculous drug
therapy usually halts further spread and induces involution.
Orificial tuberculosis (tuberculosis cutis orificialis) appears on the
mucous membranes and periorificial skin after autoinoculation of mycobacteria from sites of progressive infection. It is a sign of advanced internal disease and carries a poor prognosis, and it occurs in a sensitized host
with impaired cellular immunity. Lesions appear as painful, yellowish or
red nodules that form punched-­out ulcers with inflammation and edema
of the surrounding mucosa. Treatment consists of identification of the
source of infection and initiation of antituberculous therapy.
Miliary tuberculosis (hematogenous primary tuberculosis) rarely
manifests cutaneously and occurs most commonly in infants and in
individuals who are immunosuppressed after chemotherapy or infection with measles or HIV. The eruption consists of crops of symmetrically distributed, minute, erythematous to purpuric macules, papules, or
vesicles. The lesions may ulcerate, drain, crust, and form sinus tracts or
may form subcutaneous gummas, especially in malnourished children
with impaired immunity. Constitutional signs and symptoms are common, and a leukemoid reaction or aplastic anemia may develop. Tubercle
bacilli are readily identified in an active lesion. A fulminant course should
be anticipated, and aggressive antituberculous therapy is indicated.
Single or multiple metastatic tuberculous abscesses (tuberculous
gummas) may develop on the extremities and trunk by hematogenous
spread from a primary focus of infection during a period of decreased
immunity, particularly in malnourished and immunosuppressed children. The fluctuant, nontender, erythematous subcutaneous nodules
may ulcerate and form fistulas.
Vaccination with BCG characteristically produces a papule approximately 2 weeks after vaccination. The papule expands in size, typically ulcerates within 2-­4 months, and heals slowly with scarring. In
1-­2 per million vaccinations, a complication caused specifically by the
BCG organism occurs, including regional lymphadenitis, lupus vulgaris, scrofuloderma, and subcutaneous abscess formation. Delayed
reactivation with inflammation at the site of BCG vaccination has been
reported with Kawasaki disease and multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C), as well as immunization with the COVID19 and influenza vaccines.
Tuberculids are skin reactions that exhibit tuberculoid features histologically but do not contain detectable mycobacteria. The lesions appear
in a host who usually has moderate to strong tuberculin reactivity, has
a history of previous tuberculosis of other organs, and usually shows a
therapeutic response to antituberculous therapy. The cause of tuberculids is poorly understood. Most affected patients are in good health with
no clear focus of disease at the time of the eruption. The most commonly
observed tuberculid is the papulonecrotic tuberculid. Recurrent crops of
symmetrically distributed, asymptomatic, firm, sterile, dusky-­red papules appear on the extensor aspects of the limbs, the dorsum of the hands
and feet, and the buttocks. The papules may undergo central ulceration
and eventually heal, leaving sharply delineated, circular, depressed
scars. The duration of the eruption is variable, but it usually disappears
promptly after treatment of the primary infection. Lichen scrofulosorum, another form of tuberculid, is characterized by asymptomatic,
grouped, pinhead-­sized, often follicular pink or red papules that form
discoid plaques, mainly on the trunk. Healing occurs without scarring.
Atypical mycobacterial infection may cause cutaneous lesions in
children. Interestingly, there may be some seasonable variation in incidence. It has been postulated that vitamin D may play a role. Mycobacterium marinum is found in saltwater, freshwater, and diseased fish.
In the United States, it is most commonly acquired from tropical fish
tanks and swimming pools. Traumatic abrasion of the skin serves as a
portal of entry for the organism. Approximately 3 weeks after inoculation, a single reddish papule develops and enlarges slowly to form a violaceous nodule or, occasionally, a warty plaque (Fig. 706.13). The lesion
occasionally breaks down to form a crusted ulcer or a suppurating

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 707 u Cutaneous Fungal Infections

Fig. 706.13 Violaceous, warty plaque of Mycobacterium marinum
infection.

abscess. Sporotrichoid erythematous nodules along lymphatics may
also suppurate and drain. Lesions are most common on the elbows,
knees, and feet of swimmers and on the hands and fingers in persons
with aquarium-­acquired infection. Systemic signs and symptoms are
absent. Regional lymph nodes occasionally become slightly enlarged
but do not break down. Rarely, the infection becomes disseminated,
particularly in an immunosuppressed host. A biopsy specimen of a
fully developed lesion demonstrates a granulomatous infiltrate with
tuberculoid architecture. Treatment with two active agents is generally
recommended, with a combination of clarithromycin and ethambutol
providing a reasonable balance between effectiveness and tolerability.
Rifampin should be added to clarithromycin and ethambutol for deep
tissue involvement. Other agents with activity against M. marinum
include trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole, doxycycline, minocycline,
and ciprofloxacin. Although azithromycin has been used as an alternative to clarithromycin for some mycobacterial infections, its effectiveness against M. marinum is not known. Treatment should continue for
1-­2 months after resolution of lesions with a minimum treatment duration of 6 months. The application of heat to the affected site may be a
useful adjunctive therapy (see Chapter 263).
Mycobacterium kansasii primarily causes pulmonary disease; skin
disease is rare, often occurring in an immunocompromised host. Most
commonly, sporotrichoid nodules develop after inoculation of traumatized skin. Lesions may develop into ulcerated, crusted, or verrucous
plaques. The organism is relatively sensitive to antituberculous medications, which should be chosen on the basis of susceptibility testing.
Mycobacterium scrofulaceum causes cervical lymphadenitis (scrofuloderma) in young children, typically in the submandibular region.
Nodes enlarge over several weeks, ulcerate, and drain. The local
reaction is nontender and circumscribed, constitutional symptoms
are absent, and there generally is no evidence of lung or other organ
involvement. Other atypical mycobacteria may cause a similar presentation, including Mycobacterium avium complex, M. kansasii, and
Mycobacterium fortuitum. Treatment is accomplished by excision and
administration of antituberculous drugs (see Chapter 263).
Mycobacterium ulcerans (Buruli ulcer or Bairnsdale ulcers) causes a
painless subcutaneous nodule after inoculation of abraded skin. Most
infections occur in children in tropical rainforests. The nodule usually ulcerates, develops undermined edges, and may spread over large
areas, most commonly on an extremity. Local necrosis of subcutaneous fat, producing a septal panniculitis, is characteristic. Ulcers persist for months to years before healing spontaneously with scarring,
sometimes with contractures (if over a joint) and lymphedema. Constitutional symptoms and lymphadenopathy are absent. Diagnosis is
made by culturing the organism at 32–33°C (89.6–91.4°F). Treatment
of choice is an 8-­week course of rifampin and streptomycin with surgical debridement for larger lesions. Local heat therapy and oral chemotherapy may benefit some patients.
M. avium complex, composed of more than 20 subtypes, most
commonly causes chronic pulmonary infection. Cervical lymphadenitis and osteomyelitis occur occasionally, and papules or purulent

4159

leg ulcers occur rarely by primary inoculation. Skin lesions may be
an early sign of disseminated infection. The lesions may take various
forms, including erythematous papules, pustules, nodules, abscesses,
ulcers, panniculitis, and sporotrichoid spread along lymphatics. For
treatment, see Chapter 263.
M. fortuitum complex causes disease in an immunocompetent host
principally by primary cutaneous inoculation after traumatic injury,
injection, or surgery. A nodule, abscess, or cellulitis develops 4-­6 weeks
after inoculation. In an immunocompromised host, numerous subcutaneous nodules may form, break down, and drain. Treatment is based
on identification and susceptibility testing of the organism. Isolates are
usually susceptible to fluoroquinolones, doxycycline, minocycline, sulfonamides, cefoxitin, and imipenem; macrolides should be used with
caution because many M. fortuitum isolates have the erythromycin
methylase (erm) gene, which confers inducible resistance to macrolides
despite “susceptible” minimum inhibitory concentrations.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 707

Cutaneous Fungal
Infections
Stephen R. Humphrey
TINEA VERSICOLOR

A common, innocuous, chronic fungal infection of the stratum corneum, tinea versicolor is most often caused by the dimorphic yeast
Malassezia globosa, with Malassezia furfur and Malassezia sympodialis as less frequent causative agents. The synonyms Pityrosporum ovale
and Pityrosporum orbiculare were used previously to identify the causal
organism.

Etiology

M. globosa is part of the normal indigenous skin flora, predominantly
in the yeast form, and is found particularly in areas of skin that are
rich in sebum production. Proliferation of filamentous forms occurs
in the disease state. Predisposing factors include a warm, humid environment, excessive sweating, occlusion, high plasma cortisol levels,
immunosuppression, malnourishment, and genetically determined
susceptibility. The disease is most prevalent in adolescents and young
adults.

Clinical Manifestations

The lesions of tinea versicolor vary widely in color. In lighter skin, they
are typically reddish brown, whereas in darker skin, they may be either
hypopigmented or hyperpigmented. The characteristic macules are
covered with a fine scale. They often begin in a perifollicular location,
enlarge, and merge to form confluent patches, most commonly on the
neck, upper chest, back, and upper arms (Fig. 707.1). Facial lesions are
common in adolescents; lesions occasionally appear on the forearms,
dorsum of the hands, and pubis. There may be little or no pruritus.
Involved areas do not tan after sun exposure. A papulopustular perifollicular variant of the disorder may occur on the back, chest, and sometimes the extremities. These pustules tend to be monomorphic.

Differential Diagnosis

Examination with a Wood lamp discloses a yellowish gold fluorescence.
A potassium hydroxide (KOH) preparation of scrapings is diagnostic,
demonstrating groups of thick-­walled spores and myriad short, thick,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4160 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 707.1 Hyperpigmented, sharply demarcated macules of varying
sizes on the upper trunk characteristic of tinea versicolor.

angular hyphae resembling macaroni/spaghetti and meatballs. Skin
biopsy, including culture and special stains for fungi (periodic acid–
Schiff), are often necessary to make the diagnosis in cases of primarily follicular involvement. Microscopically, organisms and keratinous
debris can be seen within dilated follicular ostia.
Tinea versicolor must be distinguished from dermatophyte infections, seborrheic dermatitis, pityriasis alba, pityriasis rosea, and secondary syphilis. Tinea versicolor may mimic nonscaling pigmentary
disorders, such as postinflammatory pigmentary change, if a patient
has removed the scales by scrubbing. M. globosa folliculitis must be
distinguished from the other forms of folliculitis.

Treatment

Many therapeutic agents can be used to treat this disease successfully.
The causative agent, a normal human saprophyte, is not eradicated
from the skin, however, and the disorder recurs in predisposed individuals. Appropriate topical therapy may include one of the following: selenium 2% shampoo applied for 10 minutes before rinsing for 1
week, ketoconazole 2% shampoo once daily for 3 days, and terbinafine
spray once to twice daily for 1-­2 weeks. Antifungal creams are available and can be used; however, these can be impractical to apply given
the large surface of skin involved. Oral therapy may be more convenient and may be achieved successfully with fluconazole 300 mg/wk
for 2-­4 weeks or itraconazole 200 mg/24 hr for 5-­7 days. Recurrent
episodes continue to respond promptly to these agents. Oral therapy is
particularly helpful in those with severe disease or recurrent disease or
in those where topical therapies have failed. Maintenance therapy with
selenium sulfide shampoo or ketoconazole 2% shampoo once a week
may be used.

DERMATOPHYTOSES

Dermatophytoses are caused by a group of closely related filamentous
fungi with a propensity for invading the stratum corneum, hair, and
nails. The three principal genera responsible for infections are Trichophyton, Microsporum, and Epidermophyton.

Etiology

Trichophyton spp. cause lesions of all keratinized tissue, including skin,
nails, and hair. Trichophyton rubrum is the most common dermatophyte pathogen. Microsporum spp. principally invade the hair, and the
Epidermophyton spp. invade the intertriginous skin. Dermatophyte
infections are designated by the word tinea followed by the Latin word
for the anatomic site of involvement. The dermatophytes are also classified according to source and natural habitat. Fungi acquired from the
soil are called geophilic. They infect humans sporadically, inciting an
inflammatory reaction. Dermatophytes that are acquired from animals
are zoophilic. Transmission may be through direct contact or indirectly
by infected animal hair or clothing. Infected animals are frequently

Fig. 707.2 Id reaction. Papular eruption of the face associated with
severe tinea infection of the hand.

asymptomatic. Dermatophytes acquired from humans are referred to
as anthropophilic. These infestations range from chronic low-­grade to
acute inflammatory disease. Epidermophyton infections are transmitted only by humans, but various species of Trichophyton and Microsporum can be acquired from both human and nonhuman sources.

Epidemiology

Host defense has an important influence on the severity of the infection. Disease tends to be more severe in individuals with diabetes mellitus, lymphoid malignancies, immunosuppression, and states with
high plasma cortisol levels, such as Cushing syndrome. Some dermatophytes, most notably the zoophilic species, tend to elicit more severe,
suppurative inflammation in humans. Some degree of resistance to
reinfection is acquired by most infected persons and may be associated
with a delayed hypersensitivity response. However, no relationship has
been demonstrated between antibody levels and resistance to infection.
The frequency and severity of infection are also affected by the geographic locale, the genetic susceptibility of the host, and the virulence
of the strain of dermatophyte. Additional local factors that predispose
to infection include trauma to the skin, hydration of the skin with maceration, occlusion, and elevated temperature.
Occasionally, a secondary skin eruption, referred to as a dermatophytid or “id” reaction, appears in sensitized individuals and has
been attributed to circulating fungal antigens derived from the primary infection. The eruption is characterized by grouped papules
(Fig. 707.2) and vesicles and, occasionally, by sterile pustules. Symmetric urticarial lesions and a more generalized maculopapular eruption also can occur. Id reactions are most often associated with tinea
pedis, but they also occur with tinea capitis.

Tinea Capitis
Clinical Manifestations

Tinea capitis is a dermatophyte infection of the scalp most often caused
by Trichophyton tonsurans, occasionally by Microsporum canis, and,
much less commonly, by other Microsporum and Trichophyton spp.
It is particularly common in children age 3-­7 years old. In Microsporum and some Trichophyton infections, the spores are distributed in a
sheathlike fashion around the hair shaft (ectothrix infection), whereas
T. tonsurans produces an infection within the hair shaft (endothrix).
Endothrix infections may continue past the anagen phase of hair
growth into telogen and are more chronic than infections with ectothrix organisms that persist only during the anagen phase. T. tonsurans
is an anthropophilic species acquired most often by contact with
infected hairs and epithelial cells that are on such surfaces as theater
seats, hats, and combs. Dermatophyte spores may also be airborne
within the immediate environment, and high carriage rates have been
demonstrated in noninfected schoolmates and household members.
M. canis is a zoophilic species that is acquired from cats and dogs.
The clinical presentation of tinea capitis varies with the infecting organism. Endothrix infections such as those caused by T. tonsurans create a

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 707 u Cutaneous Fungal Infections

4161

A
Fig. 707.3 Black-­dot ringworm with hairs broken off at the scalp.

B
Fig. 707.6 A, Kerion. Boggy granulomatous mass of the scalp. B,
Scarring after kerion.

Fig. 707.4 Tinea capitis mimicking seborrheic dermatitis.

Microsporum audouinii, the most common cause of tinea capitis in the
1940s and 1950s, is characterized initially by a small papule at the base of
a hair follicle. The infection spreads peripherally, forming an erythematous and scaly circular plaque (ringworm) within which the infected
hairs become brittle and broken. Numerous confluent patches of alopecia develop, and patients may complain of severe pruritus. M. audouinii
infection is no longer common in the United States. Favus is a chronic
form of tinea capitis that is rare in the United States and is caused by the
fungus Trichophyton schoenleinii. Favus starts as yellowish red papules at
the opening of hair follicles. The papules expand and coalesce to form
cup-­shaped, yellowish, crusted patches that fluoresce dull green under a
Wood lamp. Other species, such as Trichophyton violaceum and Trichophyton soudanense are becoming more common with resettlement and
emigration.

Differential Diagnosis

Fig. 707.5 Lymphadenopathy associated with tinea capitis.
pattern known as “black-­dot ringworm,” characterized initially by many
small circular patches of alopecia in which hairs are broken off close to the
hair follicle (Fig. 707.3). Another clinical variant manifests as diffuse scaling, with minimal hair loss secondary. It strongly resembles seborrheic
dermatitis, psoriasis, or atopic dermatitis (Fig. 707.4). T. tonsurans may
also produce a chronic and more diffuse alopecia. Lymphadenopathy is
common (Fig. 707.5). A severe inflammatory response produces elevated,
boggy granulomatous masses (kerion), which are often studded with
pustules (Fig. 707.6A). Fever, pain, and regional adenopathy are common, and permanent scarring and alopecia may result (see Fig. 707.6B).
The zoophilic organism M. canis or the geophilic organism Microsporum gypseum also may cause kerion formation. The pattern produced by

Tinea capitis can be confused with seborrheic dermatitis, psoriasis, alopecia areata, trichotillomania, and certain dystrophic hair disorders. When
inflammation is pronounced, as in kerion, primary or secondary bacterial
infection must also be considered. In adolescents, the patchy, moth-­eaten
type of alopecia associated with secondary syphilis may resemble tinea
capitis. If scarring occurs, discoid lupus erythematosus and lichen planopilaris must also be considered in the differential diagnosis.
The important diagnostic procedures for the various dermatophyte
diseases include examination of infected hairs with a Wood lamp,
microscopic examination of KOH preparations of infected material,
and identification of the etiologic agent by culture. Hairs infected
with common Microsporum spp. fluoresce a bright blue-­green. Most
Trichophyton-­infected hairs do not fluoresce.
Microscopic examination of a KOH preparation of infected hair
from the active border of a lesion discloses tiny spores surrounding
the hair shaft in Microsporum infections and chains of spores within
the hair shaft in T. tonsurans infections. Fungal elements are not usually seen in scales. A specific etiologic diagnosis of tinea capitis may be
obtained by planting broken-­off infected hairs on Sabouraud medium
with reagents to inhibit growth of other organisms. Such identification
may require 2 weeks or more.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4162 Part XXIX u The Skin
Treatment

Oral administration of griseofulvin microcrystalline (20-­
25 mg/kg/
day with a maximum daily dose of 1000 mg, or 10-­15 mg/kg/day with
a maximum daily dose of 750 mg if the ultramicrosize form is used)
is typically the recommended treatment for all forms of tinea capitis.
Absorption of griseofulvin is enhanced by the ingestion of a fatty meal
and should be recommended for the patient. A minimum of 8 weeks
of treatment is usually required, though longer courses are sometimes
needed. Repeat fungal cultures may help guide treatment length. Treatment for 1 month after a negative culture result minimizes the risk of
recurrence. Adverse reactions to griseofulvin are rare but include nausea, vomiting, headache, blood dyscrasias, phototoxicity, and hepatotoxicity. Terbinafine dosing is weight-based. Off-label use is 125 mg
daily for 6 weeks if under 25 kg. From 25 to 35 kg, the dose is 187.5 mg
daily for 6 weeks. For patients greater than 35 kg, the dose is
250 mg daily for 6 weeks. It is possibly effective in pulse therapy, although
it has limited activity against M. canis, but better activity than griseofulvin for T. tonsurans. The oral granule formulation of terbinafine is
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for tinea
capitis in children 4 years of age and older. Oral itraconazole is useful in
instances of griseofulvin resistance, intolerance, or allergy. Itraconazole
is given for 4-­6 weeks at a dosage of 5 mg/kg/24 hr with food. This is offlabel and length of course depends on organism. Capsules are preferable
to the syrup, which may cause diarrhea. Itraconazole is not approved by
the FDA for treatment of dermatophyte infections in the pediatric population. Topical therapy alone is ineffective, but it may be an important
adjunct because it may decrease the shedding of spores and should be
recommended in all patients. Asymptomatic dermatophyte carriage in
family members is common. Because one in three families have at least
one member who is a carrier, treatment of both patient and potential carriers with a sporicidal shampoo may hasten clinical resolution. Vigorous
shampooing with a 2.5% selenium sulfide, zinc pyrithione, or ketoconazole shampoo is helpful. It is not necessary to shave the scalp.

Tinea Corporis
Clinical Manifestations

Tinea corporis, defined as infection of the glabrous skin, excluding the
palms, soles, and groin, can be caused by most of the dermatophyte
species, although T. rubrum and Trichophyton mentagrophytes are the
most prevalent etiologic organisms. In children, infections with M.
canis are also common. Tinea corporis can be acquired by direct contact with infected persons or by contact with infected scales or hairs
deposited on environmental surfaces. M. canis infections are usually
acquired from infected pets.
The most typical clinical lesion begins as a dry, mildly erythematous,
elevated, scaly papule or plaque that spreads centrifugally and clears
centrally to form the characteristic annular lesion responsible for the
designation of ringworm (Fig. 707.7). At times, plaques with advancing borders may spread over large areas. Grouped pustules are another
variant. Most lesions clear spontaneously within several months, but
some may become chronic. Central clearing does not always occur
(Fig. 707.8), and differences in host response may result in wide variability in the clinical appearance; for example, granulomatous lesions
called Majocchi granuloma, which are caused by the penetration of
organisms along the hair follicle to the level of the dermis, produce a
fungal folliculitis and perifolliculitis (Fig. 707.9) and the kerion-­like
lesions referred to as tinea profunda. Majocchi granuloma is more
common after inappropriate treatment with topical corticosteroids,
especially the superpotent class.

Differential Diagnosis

Many skin lesions, both infectious and noninfectious, must be differentiated from the lesions of tinea corporis. Those most frequently
confused are granuloma annulare, nummular eczema, pityriasis rosea,
psoriasis, seborrheic dermatitis, erythema chronicum migrans, and
tinea versicolor. Microscopic examination of KOH wet mount preparations and cultures should always be performed when fungal infection
is considered. Tinea corporis usually does not fluoresce with a Wood
lamp.

Fig. 707.7 Annular plaque of tinea corporis with central clearing.

Fig. 707.8 Minimal central clearing with tinea corporis.

Fig. 707.9 Follicular papule and pustule in Majocchi granuloma after
use of a superpotent topical steroid.

Treatment

Tinea corporis usually responds to treatment with one of the topical
antifungal agents (e.g., imidazoles, terbinafine, butenafine, naftifine)
twice daily for 2-­4 weeks. In unusually severe or extensive disease,
a course of therapy with oral griseofulvin microcrystalline may be
required for 4 weeks. Terbinafine for 2 weeks can also be used. Itraconazole has produced excellent results in many cases with a 1-­to 2-­week
course of oral therapy. Combination topical corticosteroid/antifungal
preparations should not be used, as they may result in worsening or
persistent infection.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 707 u Cutaneous Fungal Infections
Tinea Cruris
Clinical Manifestations

Tinea cruris, or infection of the groin, occurs most often in adolescent
males and is usually caused by the anthropophilic species Epidermophyton floccosum or T. rubrum, but occasionally by the zoophilic species
T. mentagrophytes.
The initial clinical lesion is a small, raised, scaly, erythematous
patch on the inner aspect of the thigh. This spreads peripherally,
often developing numerous tiny vesicles at the advancing margin. It
eventually forms bilateral, irregular, sharply bordered patches with
hyperpigmented scaly centers. In some cases, particularly in infections with T. mentagrophytes, the inflammatory reaction is more
intense and the infection may spread beyond the crural region. The
scrotum and labia are usually not involved in the infection, which
is an important distinction from candidiasis. Pruritus may be severe
initially but abates as the inflammatory reaction subsides. Bacterial
superinfection may alter the clinical appearance, and erythrasma or
candidiasis may coexist. Tinea cruris is more prevalent in obese persons and in persons who perspire excessively and wear tight-­fitting
clothing. It is a good idea to examine a patient’s feet, which can be a
source for tinea cruris.

Differential Diagnosis

The diagnosis of tinea cruris is confirmed by culture and by demonstration of septate hyphae on a KOH preparation of epidermal scrapings.
The disorder must be differentiated from intertrigo, allergic contact
dermatitis, candidiasis, and erythrasma. Bacterial superinfection must
be precluded when there is a severe inflammatory reaction.

Treatment

Patients should be advised to wear loose cotton underwear. Topical
treatment with an imidazole twice a day for 3-­4 weeks is recommended
for severe infection, especially because these agents are effective in
mixed candidal-­dermatophytic infections. Oral treatments, as mentioned earlier, may also be used.

4163

mild erythema (Fig. 707.11). In some cases, two feet and one hand are
involved. This type of infection is more refractory to treatment and
tends to recur. An inflammatory vesicular type of reaction may occur
with T. mentagrophytes infection. This type is most common in young
children. The lesions involve any area of the foot, including the dorsal
surface, and are usually circumscribed. The initial papules progress to
vesicles and bullae that may become pustular (Fig. 707.12). A number
of factors, such as occlusive footwear and warm, humid weather, predispose to infection. Tinea pedis may be transmitted in shower facilities and swimming pool areas.

Differential Diagnosis

Tinea pedis must be differentiated from simple maceration and peeling
of the interdigital spaces, which is common in children. Infection with
Candida albicans and various bacterial organisms (erythrasma) may
cause confusion or may coexist with primary tinea pedis. Contact dermatitis, vesicular foot dermatitis, atopic dermatitis, and juvenile plantar dermatitis also simulate tinea pedis. Fungal mycelia can be seen on
microscopic examination of a KOH preparation or by culture.

Treatment

Treatment for mild infections includes simple measures such as avoidance of occlusive footwear, careful drying between the toes after
bathing, and the use of an absorbent antifungal powder such as zinc
undecylenate. Topical therapy with an imidazole is curative in most
cases. Each of these agents is also effective against candidal infection.
Several weeks of therapy may be necessary, and low-­grade, chronic
infections, particularly those caused by T. rubrum, may be refractory.
In refractory cases, oral griseofulvin therapy may effect a cure, but
recurrences are common.

Tinea Pedis
Clinical Manifestations

Tinea pedis (athlete’s foot), infection of the toe webs and soles of the
feet, is uncommon in young children but occurs with some frequency
in preadolescent and adolescent males. The usual etiologic agents are T.
rubrum, T. mentagrophytes, and E. floccosum.
Most commonly, the lateral toe webs (third to fourth and fourth to
fifth interdigital spaces) and the subdigital crevice are fissured, with
maceration and peeling of the surrounding skin (Fig. 707.10). Severe
tenderness, itching, and a persistent foul odor are characteristic. These
lesions may become chronic. This type of infection may involve overgrowth by bacterial flora, including Kytococcus sedentarius, Brevibacterium epidermidis, and gram-­negative organisms. Less commonly, a
chronic diffuse hyperkeratosis of the sole of the foot occurs with only

Fig. 707.11 Diffuse, minimally erythematous tinea pedis.

Fig. 707.10 Interdigital tinea pedis.

Fig. 707.12 Vesicobullous tinea pedis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4164 Part XXIX u The Skin
Tinea Unguium
Clinical Manifestations

Tinea unguium (onychomycosis) is a dermatophyte infection of the
nail plate. It occurs most often in patients with tinea pedis, but it may
occur as a primary infection. It can be caused by a number of dermatophytes, of which T. rubrum and T. mentagrophytes are the most
common.
The most superficial form of tinea unguium (i.e., white superficial
onychomycosis) is caused by T. mentagrophytes. It manifests as irregular single or numerous white patches on the surface of the nail unassociated with paronychial inflammation or deep infection. T. rubrum
generally causes a more invasive, subungual infection that is initiated at
the lateral distal margins of the nail and is often preceded by mild paronychia. The middle and ventral layers of the nail plate, and perhaps the
nail bed, are the sites of infection. The nail initially develops a yellowish discoloration and slowly becomes thickened, brittle, and loosened
from the nail bed (Fig. 707.13). In advanced infection, the nail may
turn dark brown to black and may crack or break off.

Differential Diagnosis

Tinea unguium must be differentiated from various dystrophic nail disorders. Changes as a result of trauma, psoriasis, lichen planus, eczema,
and trachyonychia can all be confused with tinea unguium. Nails
infected with C. albicans have several distinguishing features; most
prominently, a pronounced paronychial swelling. Thin shavings taken
from the infected nail, preferably from the deeper areas, should be
examined microscopically with KOH and cultured. Repeated attempts
may be required to demonstrate the fungus. Histologic evaluation of
nail clippings with special stains for dermatophytes can be diagnostic.

Treatment

Systemic antifungals are more effective at treating onychomycosis than
topical antifungals. The long half-­life of itraconazole in the nail has led
to promising trials of intermittent short courses of therapy (double the
normal dose for 1 week of each month for 3-­4 months). Oral terbinafine is also used for the treatment of onychomycosis. Terbinafine once
daily for 12 weeks is more effective than itraconazole pulse therapy.
Pulse terbinafine treatment has also been used in adults and has been
effective. Topical antifungals may be an acceptable treatment for mild
disease without matrix involvement, and typically children have a
better response to topical therapy than adults, likely because of faster
growth of the nails. Several topical agents have been FDA approved
for the treatment of onychomycosis in adults, including ciclopirox,
efinaconazole, and tavaborole. Small clinical trials have demonstrated
efficacy of ciclopirox in children. Efinaconazole and tavaborole can be
used in children 6 and older as well.

Tinea Nigra Palmaris

Tinea nigra palmaris is a rare but distinctive superficial fungal infection that occurs principally in children and adolescents. It is caused
by the dimorphic fungus Phaeoannellomyces werneckii, which imparts

a gray-­black color to the affected palm. The characteristic lesion is a
well-­defined hyperpigmented macule. Scaling and erythema are rare,
and the lesions are asymptomatic. Tinea nigra is often mistaken for
a junctional nevus, melanoma, or staining of the skin by contactants.
Treatment is with an imidazole antifungal. Keratolytic agents, such as
salicylic acid, once to twice daily can also be used.

CANDIDAL INFECTIONS (CANDIDIASIS AND
MONILIASIS)

See Chapter 280.
The dimorphic yeasts of the genus Candida are ubiquitous in the
environment, but C. albicans usually causes candidiasis in children.
This yeast is not part of the indigenous skin flora, but it is a frequent
transient on skin and may colonize the human alimentary tract and
the vagina as a saprophytic organism. Certain environmental conditions, notably elevated temperature and humidity, are associated with
an increased frequency of isolation of C. albicans from the skin. Many
bacterial species inhibit the growth of C. albicans, and alteration of
normal flora by the use of antibiotics may promote overgrowth of the
yeast.
Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis is associated with a diverse
group of primary immunodeficiency diseases (Table 707.1). Chronic
mucocutaneous candidiasis is characterized by chronic or recurrent Candida infections of the oral cavity, esophagus, genitals, nails,
and skin. Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis may also be seen as an
acquired infection in patients with HIV infection and during immunosuppressive treatments.

Oral Candidiasis (Thrush)
See Chapter 280.

Vaginal Candidiasis

See Chapters 163 and 280.
C. albicans is an inhabitant of the vagina in 5–10% of women, and
vaginal candidiasis is not uncommon in adolescent girls. A number of
factors can predispose to this infection, including antibiotic therapy,
corticosteroid therapy, diabetes mellitus, pregnancy, and the use of oral
contraceptives. The infection manifests as cheesy white plaques on an
erythematous vaginal mucosa and a thick white-­yellow discharge. The
disease may be relatively mild or may produce pronounced inflammation and scaling of the external genitals and surrounding skin with
progression to vesiculation and ulceration. Patients often complain of
severe itching and burning in the vaginal area. Before treatment is initiated, the diagnosis should be confirmed by microscopic examination
and/or culture. The infection may be eradicated by insertion of nystatin
or imidazole vaginal tablets, suppositories, creams, or foam. If these
products are ineffective, the addition of one dose of fluconazole (150
mg) is effective for adolescents.

Congenital Cutaneous Candidiasis
See Chapter 280.

Candidal Diaper Dermatitis

Fig. 707.13 Hyperkeratotic nail in onychomycosis.

Candidal diaper dermatitis is a ubiquitous problem in infants and,
although relatively benign, is often frustrating because of its tendency
to recur. Predisposed infants usually carry C. albicans in their intestinal
tracts, and the warm, moist, occluded skin of the diaper area provides
an optimal environment for its growth. A seborrheic, atopic, or primary
irritant contact dermatitis usually provides a portal of entry for the yeast.
The primary clinical manifestation consists of an intensely erythematous, confluent plaque with a scalloped border and a sharply demarcated edge. It is formed by the confluence of numerous papules and
vesicular pustules. Satellite pustules, those that stud the contiguous
skin, are a hallmark of localized candidal infections. The perianal skin,
inguinal folds, perineum, and lower abdomen are usually involved (Fig.
707.14). In males, the entire scrotum and penis may be involved, with
an erosive balanitis of the perimeatal skin. In females, the lesions may
be found on the vaginal mucosa and labia. In some infants, the process is generalized, with erythematous lesions distant from the diaper

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 707 u Cutaneous Fungal Infections

4165

Table 707.1  Primary Immunodeficiencies Underlying Candida and Other Fungal Infections
DISEASE
CMC
SCID

CID
CD25 deficiency
NEMO or iκBγ deficiency

ASSOCIATED INFECTIONS

IMMUNOLOGIC PHENOTYPE

GENE, TRANSMISSION

Bacteria, viruses, fungi,
mycobacteria

No T cells, with or without B and/
or NK cell lymphopenia

>30 genes:
IL2RG, X-­linked; JAK3, autosomal
recessive; RAG1, autosomal
recessive; RAG2, autosomal
recessive; ARTEMIS, autosomal
recessive; ADA, autosomal
recessive; CD3, autosomal
recessive, etc.

Viruses and bacteria

T-­cell defect

IL2RA, autosomal recessive

Pyogenic bacteria, mycobacteria,
viruses

NEMO or IKBG X-­linked

IκBα GOF pathogenic variant

IKBA, autosomal dominant

DOCK8 deficiency

Viruses, bacteria and fungi

DOCK8, autosomal recessive

TCR-­α deficiency

Viruses and bacteria

TCRA, autosomal recessive

CRACM1 deficiency

Viruses, mycobacteria, bacteria
and fungi

CRACM1, autosomal recessive

MST1/STK4 deficiency

Viruses and bacteria

MST1/STK4, autosomal recessive

MHC class II deficiency

Viruses, bacteria and fungi

CIITA, RFXANK, RFXC, RFXAP, all
autosomal recessive

Idiopathic CD4 lymphopenia

Pneumocystis, Cryptococcus, virus

CD4 T cells <300 cells/mm3

UNC119, autosomal dominant,
MAGT1 X-­linked, RAG1,
autosomal recessive

SYNDROMIC CMC
Interleukin-­12Rβ1 and interleukin-­
12p40 deficiencies

Mycobacteria, Salmonella

Deficit of interleukin-­17–
producing T cells

IL12RB1, autosomal recessive,
IL12B, autosomal recessive

STAT3 deficiency (autosomal
dominant-­HIES)

Staphylococcus aureus,
Aspergillus

Hyperimmunoglobulin E, deficit of
interleukin-­17–producing T cells

STAT3, autosomal dominant

APECED/APS-­1

No

Neutralizing antiinterleukin-­17A,
antiinterleukin-­17F, and/or
antiinterleukin-­22 autoantibodies

AIRE, autosomal recessive

CARD9 deficiency

Dermatophytes, Candida, brain
abscess

Deficit of interleukin-­17–
producing T cells

CARD9, autosomal recessive

CMCD
Complete interleukin-­17RA
deficiency

S. aureus

No interleukin-­17 response

IL17RA, autosomal recessive

Partial interleukin-­17F deficiency

S. aureus

Impaired interleukin-­17F,
interleukin-­17A/F function

IL17F, autosomal dominant

STAT1 GOF pathogenic variants

Bacteria, viruses, fungi,
mycobacteria

Low interleukin-­17–producing T
cells

STAT1, autosomal dominant

CMC, Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis; SCID, severe combined immunodeficiency; NK, natural killer; CID, combined immunodeficiency; NEMO, nuclear factor κβ essential
modulator; iκBγ, inhibitor of nuclear factor of kappa light polypeptide gene enhancer in B cells, gamma; IκBα, inhibitor of nuclear factor of kappa light polypeptide gene enhancer
in B cells, alpha; GOF, gain-­of-­function; DOCK8, dedicator of cytokinesis 8; TCR, T-­cell receptor; CRACM1, calcium release-­activated calcium modulator 1; MST1, macrophage
stimulating 1; STK4, serine/threonine protein kinase 4; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; STAT, signal transducer and activator of transcription; HIES, hyperimmunoglobulin E
syndrome; APECED, autoimmune polyendocrinopathy–candidiasis–ectodermal dystrophy; APS-­1, autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome type 1; AIRE, autoimmune regulator;
CARD9, caspase recruitment domain-­containing protein 9; CMCD, chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis disease.
From Lanternier F, Cypowyj S, Picard, C, et al. Primary immunodeficiencies underlying fungal infections. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2013;25:736–747.

area. In some cases, the generalized process may represent a fungal id
(hypersensitivity) reaction.
The differential diagnosis of candidal diaper dermatitis includes
other eruptions of the diaper area that may coexist with candidal infection. For this reason, it is important to establish a diagnosis by means
of KOH preparation or culture.
Treatment consists of applications of an imidazole cream 2 times
daily. The combination of a corticosteroid and an antifungal agent

may be justified if inflammation is severe but may confuse the
situation if the diagnosis is not firmly established. Corticosteroids
should not be continued for more than a few days. Protection of the
diaper area by an application of thick zinc oxide paste overlying the
anticandidal preparation may be helpful. The paste is more easily
removed with mineral oil than with soap and water. Fungal id reactions gradually abate with successful treatment of the diaper dermatitis or may be treated with a mild corticosteroid preparation. When

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4166 Part XXIX u The Skin
pruritus from pinworm infestation. It may become superinfected
with C. albicans, especially in children who are receiving oral antibiotic or corticosteroid medication. The involved skin becomes erythematous, macerated, and excoriated, and the lesions are identical
to those of candidal intertrigo or candidal diaper rash. Application
of a topical antifungal agent in conjunction with improved hygiene
is usually effective. Underlying disorders such as pinworm infection
must also be treated (see Chapter 339).

Candidal Paronychia and Onychia
See Chapter 704.

Candidal Granuloma
Fig. 707.14 Erythematous confluent plaque caused by candidal infection.

Candidal granuloma is a rare response to an invasive candidal infection of skin. The lesions appear as crusted, verrucous plaques and
hornlike projections on the scalp, face, and distal limbs. Affected
patients may have single or numerous defects in immune mechanisms, and the granulomas are often refractory to topical therapy. A
systemic anticandidal agent may be required for palliation or eradication of the infection.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 708

Cutaneous Viral Infections
Lamiaa Hamie and Stephen R. Humphrey
Fig. 707.15 Intertriginous candidiasis of the neck.

recurrences of diaper candidiasis are frequent, it may be helpful to
prescribe a course of oral anticandidal therapy to decrease the yeast
population in the gastrointestinal tract. Some infants seem to be
receptive hosts for C. albicans and may reacquire the organism from
a colonized adult.

Intertriginous Candidiasis

Intertriginous candidiasis occurs most often in the axillae and
groin, on the neck (Fig. 707.15), under the breasts, under pendulous abdominal fat folds, in the umbilicus, and in the gluteal cleft.
Typical lesions are large, confluent areas of moist, denuded, erythematous skin with an irregular, macerated, scaly border. Satellite
lesions are characteristic and consist of small vesicles or pustules on
an erythematous base. With time, intertriginous candidal lesions
may become lichenified, dry, scaly plaques. The lesions develop on
skin subjected to irritation and maceration. Candidal superinfection is more likely to occur under conditions that lead to excessive perspiration, especially in obese children and in children with
underlying disorders, such as diabetes mellitus. A similar condition,
interdigital candidiasis, commonly occurs in individuals whose
hands are constantly immersed in water. Fissures occur between the
fingers and have red denuded centers, with an overhanging white
epithelial fringe. Similar lesions between the toes may be secondary
to occlusive footwear. Treatment is the same as for other candidal
infections.

Perianal Candidiasis

Perianal dermatitis develops at sites of skin irritation as a result
of occlusion, constant moisture, poor hygiene, anal fissures, and

WART (VERRUCA)
Etiology

Human papillomaviruses (HPVs) cause a spectrum of diseases from
warts (verrucae vulgaris) to squamous cell carcinoma of the skin
and mucous membranes, including the larynx (see Chapter 438.2).
The HPVs are classified by genus, species, and type. More than 200
types are known, and the entire genomes of approximately 100 are
completely sequenced. The incidence of all types of warts is highest
in children and adolescents. HPV is spread by direct contact and
autoinoculation; transmission within families and by fomites also
occurs. The clinical manifestations of infection develop 1 month or
longer after inoculation and depend on the HPV type, the size of
the inoculum, the immune status of the host, and the anatomic site.

Clinical Manifestations

Cutaneous warts develop in 5–10% of children. Common warts
(verruca vulgaris), caused most commonly by HPV types 2 and 4,
occur most frequently on the fingers, dorsum of the hands (Fig.
708.1), paronychial areas, face, knees, and elbows. They are well-­
circumscribed papules with an irregular, roughened, keratotic
surface. When the surface is pared away, many black dots representing thrombosed dermal capillary loops are often visible. Periungual warts are often painful and may spread beneath the nail
plate, separating it from the nail bed (Fig. 708.2). Plantar warts
(verruca plantaris), although similar to the common wart, are
caused by HPV type 1 and are usually flush with the surface of the
sole because of the constant pressure from weight bearing. When
plantar warts become hyperkeratotic (Fig. 708.3), they may be painful. Similar lesions (palmar-­verruca palmaris) can also occur on
the palms. They are sharply demarcated, often with a ring of thick
callus. The surface keratotic material must sometimes be removed
before the boundaries of the wart can be appreciated. Several

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 708 u Cutaneous Viral Infections

Fig. 708.1 Verrucous papules on the back of the hand.

Fig. 708.2 Periungual wart with disruption of nail growth.

Fig. 708.3 Hyperkeratotic plantar wart.

contiguous warts (HPV type 4) may fuse to form a large plaque,
known as the mosaic wart. Flat warts (verruca plana), caused by
HPV types 3 and 10, are slightly elevated, minimally hyperkeratotic papules that usually remain <3 mm in diameter and vary in
color from pink to brown. They may occur in profusion on the face,
arms, dorsum of the hands, and knees. The distribution of several
lesions along a line of cutaneous trauma (koebnerization) is a helpful diagnostic feature (Fig. 708.4). Lesions may be disseminated in
the beard area and on the legs by shaving and from the hairline onto

4167

Fig. 708.4 Multiple flat warts on the face with lesions in line of
trauma.

Fig. 708.5 Condylomata acuminata in the perianal area of a toddler.

the scalp by combing the hair. Epidermodysplasia verruciformis
(EVER1, EVER2 genes), caused primarily by HPV types 5 and 8 (β-­
papillomaviruses, species 1), manifests as many diffuse verrucous
papules. Wart types 9, 12, 14, 15, 17, 25, 36, 38, 47, and 50 may
also be involved. Inheritance is thought to be primarily autosomal
recessive, but an X-­linked recessive form has also been postulated.
Warts progress to squamous cell carcinoma in 10% of patients with
epidermodysplasia verruciformis.
Genital HPV infection occurs in sexually active adolescents,
most commonly as a result of infection with HPV types 6 and 11.
Condylomata acuminata (mucous membrane warts) are moist,
fleshy, papillomatous lesions that occur on the perianal mucosa
(Fig. 708.5), labia, vaginal introitus, and perineal raphe and on the
shaft, corona, and glans penis. Occasionally, they can obstruct the
urethral meatus or the vaginal introitus. Because they are located in
intertriginous areas, they may become moist and friable. When left
untreated, condylomata proliferate and become confluent, at times
forming large cauliflower-­like masses. Lesions can also occur on the
lips, gingivae, tongue, and conjunctivae. Genital warts in children
may occur after inoculation during birth through an infected birth
canal, as a consequence of sexual abuse, or from incidental spread
from cutaneous warts. A significant proportion of genital warts in
children contain HPV types that are usually isolated from cutaneous warts. HPV infection of the cervix is a major risk factor for the
development of carcinoma, particularly if the infection is caused by
HPV type 16, 18, 31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 52, 59, 67, 68, or 70. Immunization against types 6, 11, 16, 18, 31, 33, 45, 52, and 58 is available
(see Chapter 438.2). Laryngeal (respiratory) papillomas contain
the same HPV types as in anogenital papillomas. Transmission is
believed to occur from mothers with a genital HPV infection to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4168 Part XXIX u The Skin
Prolonged, severe, or recalcitrant warts with
lymphopenia

Check quantitative immunoglobulins

↑or normal
IgG, IgA
↓IgM
↑or normal
IgG, IgA

↓↓↓ or absent
IgG,A,M,E

↓or normal
IgA, M, E

Lymphocyte subset

Lymphocyte subset

CD3 count
may be
normal in EV

↓CD3
↓CD16
↓CD20

CD4<300
CD8, CD20,
CD16 variable

STK4
sequencing

SPINKS
sequencing

AT

DOCK8

Infectious,
rheumatologic,
hematologic, and
oncologic
evaluation: if
negative

EV

Netherton
syndrome

ADA
functional
analysis

GATA2
sequencing

ATM
sequencing
STK4

Neutropenia

↓CD4, CD8
Variable IgM
↓CD4
↑IgM
↓IgG, IgA, IgE

↓↓CD4, CD8
↓↓CD20
↓↓CD16

↓CD4
↓CD20
↓CD16
EVER1/2
sequencing

Lymphocyte subset

CD3 count may
be normal in
GXTA2

Monocytopenia
↓CD4
↓CD16
Normal CD20

↑IgM

Lymphocyte subset
↓CD3
Normal
CD20,
CD16
CD3

*May also have high
IgA and IgE and neopterin

Lymphocyte subset

DOCK8
sequencing

↓IgG

Normal
immunoglobulins

Lymphocyte subset

↓CD4
↓or normal CD20
Normal CD8, CD16
Lymphocyte subset

↓CD4
↓CD8
Normal
CD20,
CD16

↓or normal IgG

↑IgG

↑↑↑IgE

NEMO
sequencing
ADCC

CXC84
sequencing
CD40L
sequencing

WHIM
NEMO

ADA SCID

GATA2
ICL

HIGMI

Fig. 708.6 Algorithm for diagnosis of primary immune deficiency with warts and lymphopenia. ADA SCID, adenosine deaminase severe combined

immunodeficiency; AT, ataxia-telanglectasia; DOCK8, Dedicator of cytokinesis 8; EV, epidermodysplasia verruciformis; ICL, idiopathic CD4 lymphopenia; NEMO, nuclear factor κB essential modulator deficiency; STK4, serine/threonine kinase 4 deficiency; WHIM, warts, hypogammaglobulinemia,
recurrent bacterial infections, and myelokathexis; XHIGM1, x-linked hyper IgM syndrome type 1/CD40L deficiency. (From Lieding JW, Holland SM.
Warts and all: HPV in primary immunodeficiencies. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2012;130[5]:1030–1048, Fig. 3, p. 1043.)

neonates who aspirate infectious virus during birth and may subsequently develop laryngeal papillomatosis.

Differential Diagnosis

Common warts are most often confused with molluscum contagiosum. Plantar and palmar warts may be difficult to distinguish from
punctate keratoses, corns, and calluses. In contrast to calluses, warts
obliterate normal skin markings. Juvenile flat warts mimic lichen
planus, lichen nitidus, angiofibromas, syringomas, milia, and acne.
Condylomata acuminata may resemble condylomata lata of secondary syphilis. Patients with recurrent, multiple, difficult-­to-­treat or
disseminated warts may have a primary immune deficiency disorder
(Fig. 708.6).

Treatment

Various therapeutic measures are effective in the treatment of warts.
More than 65% of warts disappear spontaneously within 2 years. Warts
are epidermal lesions and do not produce scarring unless subjected to
surgical procedures or overly aggressive treatments. Hyperkeratotic
lesions (common, plantar, and palmar warts) are more responsive
to therapy if the excess keratotic debris is gently pared with a scalpel
until thrombosed capillaries are apparent; further paring may induce

bleeding. Treatment is most successful when performed regularly and
frequently (every 2-­4 weeks).
Common warts can be eradicated by applications of liquid nitrogen or by laser therapy, such as carbon dioxide or pulsed dye laser.
Daily application of salicylic acid in flexible collodion or as a stick
is a slow but painless method of removal that is effective in some
patients. Plantar and palmar warts may be treated with 40% salicylic
acid plasters. These should be applied for 5 days at a time with a
2-­day rest period between applications. After removal of the plaster
and prolonged soaking in hot water, keratotic debris can be removed
with an emery board or pumice stone. Condylomata respond best
to weekly applications of 25% podophyllin in tincture of benzoin.
The medication should be left on the warts for 4-­6 hours and then
removed by bathing. Keratinized warts near the genitals (buttocks)
do not respond to podophyllin. Imiquimod (5% cream) applied 3
times weekly is also beneficial. Imiquimod is not only indicated for
genital warts but also has been used successfully to treat warts in
other locations; however, it can cause inflammation and irritation,
particularly in occluded areas. For nongenital warts, imiquimod
should be applied daily. Cimetidine 30-­40 mg/kg/day by mouth has
been used in children with multiple warts unresponsive to other
treatment, though its efficacy remains unclear. Immunotherapy
with intralesional candida, MMR (measles, mumps, and rubella)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 708 u Cutaneous Viral Infections

Fig. 708.7 Grouped molluscum.

4169

Fig. 708.8 Molluscum with surrounding dermatitis.

vaccine or Trichophyton antigen may also be employed, especially
when lesions are numerous or resistant to other therapies. Immunotherapy is performed in clinic, and multiple treatments at 1-month
intervals (at least three to four) are usually required. With all types
of therapy, care should be taken to protect the surrounding normal
skin from irritation. Other treatments include 5-­f luorouracil, a chemotherapy agent, which can be helpful, particularly when used with
occlusion and sometimes in combination with salicylic acid. Topical cidofovir, an antiviral agent, and intralesional bleomycin, have
also been used in refractory cases.

MOLLUSCUM CONTAGIOSUM
Etiology

The poxvirus that causes molluscum contagiosum is a large double-­
stranded DNA virus that replicates in the cytoplasm of host epithelial cells. Type 1 virus causes most infections. The disease is
acquired by direct contact with an infected person or from fomites and is spread by autoinoculation. Children age 2-­6 years who
are otherwise well and individuals who are immunosuppressed are
most commonly affected. The incubation period is estimated to be
2 weeks or longer.

Clinical Manifestations

Discrete, pearly, skin-­colored, smooth, dome-­shaped papules vary in
size from 1 to 5 mm. They typically have a central umbilication from
which a plug of cheesy material can be expressed. Although these papules can emerge anywhere on the body, they have a predilection for
sites such as the face, eyelids, neck, axillae, and thighs (Fig. 708.7). They
may be found in clusters on the genitals or in the groin of adolescents
and may be associated with other venereal diseases in sexually active
individuals. Lesions commonly involve the genital area in children but
are not acquired by sexual transmission in most cases. Mild surrounding erythema or an eczematous dermatitis may accompany the papules
(Fig. 708.8). Lesions on patients with AIDS tend to be large and numerous, particularly on the face. Exuberant lesions may also be found in
children with leukemia and other immunodeficiencies. Children with
atopic dermatitis are susceptible to widespread involvement in areas
of dermatitis. A pustular eruption can develop at the site of individual
molluscum lesions (Fig. 708.9). It is not a secondary bacterial infection,
but rather an immunologic reaction to the molluscum virus; hence
treatment with antibiotics is unnecessary. Atrophic scars may often follow this type of reaction.

Differential Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of molluscum contagiosum includes
trichoepithelioma, basal cell carcinoma, ectopic sebaceous glands,
syringoma, hidrocystoma, keratoacanthoma, juvenile xanthogranulomas, and warty dyskeratoma. In individuals with AIDS,

Fig. 708.9 Inflamed molluscum. Crusted papule at the site of a previous molluscum.

cryptococcosis may be indistinguishable clinically from molluscum
contagiosum. Rarely, coccidioidomycosis, histoplasmosis, or Penicillium marneffei infection masquerades as molluscum-­like lesions
in an immunocompromised host.

Treatment

Molluscum contagiosum is a self-limited disease, with an average
duration of 6-9 months. However, lesions can persist for years,
spreading to distant sites and potentially transmitting to others.
Affected patients should be advised to avoid shared baths and
towels until the infection is clear. In cases of atopic dermatitis or
immunodeficiency, infection may rapidly spread, leading to the
development of hundreds of lesions in children. Immunotherapy
with either Candida or Trichophyton antigen is the most commonly
used treatment. This is repeated every 4 weeks until resolution. If
lesions are limited in number, then depending on the age of the
patient, individual lesions can be treated with liquid nitrogen cryotherapy. For younger children, cantharidin may be applied to the
lesions and covered with adhesive bandages to prevent unwanted
spread of the blistering agent. A blister forms at the application site,
facilitating the removal of the molluscum. However, it’s important
to note that cantharidin should not be applied to the face. Cantharidin availability is either very limited or completely unavailable in
the United States. Imiquimod has not been proven more effective
than placebo in randomized trials. Considering that molluscum is
an epidermal disease, caution should be exercised to avoid excessive
treatment that may result in scarring.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4170 Part XXIX u The Skin

Chapter 709

Arthropod Bites and
Infestations
709.1 Arthropod Bites
Lamiaa Hamie and Stephen R. Humphrey
Arthropod bites are a common affliction of children and occasionally
pose a problem in diagnosis. A patient may be unaware of the source
of the lesions or may deny being bitten, making interpretation of the
eruption difficult. In these cases, knowledge of the habits, life cycle,
and clinical signs of the more common arthropod pests of humans may
help lead to a correct diagnosis (Table 709.1).

immediate petechial reaction is occasionally seen. After repeated bites,
sensitivity develops, producing a pruritic papule (Fig. 709.1) approximately 24 hours after the bite. This is the most common reaction seen in
young children. With prolonged, repeated exposure, a wheal develops
within minutes after a bite, followed 24 hours later by papule, vesicle,
or bullae formation. By adolescence or adulthood, only a wheal may
form, unaccompanied by the delayed papular reaction. Thus adults in
the same household as affected children may be unaffected. Ultimately,
as a person becomes insensitive to the bite, no reaction occurs at all.
This stage of nonreactivity is maintained only as long as the individual
continues to be bitten regularly. Individuals in whom papular urticaria
develops are in the transitional phase between development of a primarily delayed papular reaction and development of an immediate
urticarial reaction.
Arthropod bites may occur as solitary, numerous, or profuse lesions,
depending on the feeding habits of the perpetrator. Fleas tend to sample
their host several times within a small localized area, whereas mosquitoes tend to attack a host at more randomly scattered sites. Delayed

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The type of reaction that occurs after an arthropod bite depends on
the insect species and the age-­group and reactivity of the human
host. Arthropods may cause injury to a host by various mechanisms,
including mechanical trauma, such as the lacerating bite of a tsetse
fly; invasion of host tissues, as in myiasis; contact dermatitis, as seen
with repeated exposure to cockroach antigens; granulomatous reaction to retained mouthparts; transmission of systemic disease; injection of irritant cytotoxic or pharmacologically active substances, such
as hyaluronidase, proteases, peptidases, and phospholipases in sting
venom; and induction of anaphylaxis. Most reactions to arthropod
bites depend on antibody formation to antigenic substances in saliva
or venom. The type of reaction is determined primarily by the degree
of previous exposure to the same or a related species of arthropod.
When someone is bitten for the first time, no reaction develops. An

Fig. 709.1 Pruritic papules after bed bug bites.

Table 709.1  Bed Bugs Versus Other Arthropod Bites: Main Clinical and Epidemiologic Features*
ARTHROPOD

CLINICAL FEATURES ON
EXAMINATION

LOCATION

TIMING OF PRURITUS

CONTEXT

Bed bugs

3-­4 bites in a line or curve

Uncovered areas

Morning

Traveling

Fleas

3-­4 bites in a line or curve

Legs and buttocks

Daytime

Pet owners or rural living

Mosquitoes

Nonspecific urticarial
papules

Potentially anywhere

Anopheles spp. night;
Culex spp. night; Aedes
spp. day

Worldwide distribution

Head lice

Live lice on the head
associated with itchy,
scratched lesions

Scalp, ears, and neck

Any

Children, parents, or
contact with children

Body lice

Excoriated papules and
hyperpigmentation; live
lice inside clothes

Back

Any

Unhoused people

Sarcoptes scabiei mites
(scabies)

Vesicles, burrows,
nodules, and nonspecific
secondary lesions

Interdigital spaces,
forearms, breasts,
genitals

Night

Sexually transmitted,
households or
institutions

Ticks

Erythema migrans or ulcer

Potentially anywhere

Asymptomatic

Pet owners or hikers

Pyemotes ventricosus

Comet sign, a linear,
erythematous, macular
tract

Under clothes

Any time when inside
habitat

People exposed
to woodworm-­
contaminated furniture
(Pediculoides ventricosus
is a woodworm parasite)

Spiders

Necrosis (uncommon)

Face and arms

Immediate pain, no itching

Rural living

*It is difficult to diagnose a bite. Diagnosis relies on an array of arguments, none of which is specific by itself; it is the association of elements that is suggestive. Any arthropod bite
can be totally asymptomatic.
From Bernardeschi C, Le Cleach L, Delaunay P, Chosidow O. Bed bug infestation [published correction appears in BMJ. 2013;346:F1044]. BMJ. 2013;346:f138.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 709 u Arthropod Bites and Infestations 4171
Table 709.2  Patient Education to Eliminate Bed Bugs
DETECTION
• Look for brown insects no bigger than apple seeds on the
mattress, sofa, and curtains and in darker places in the room
(especially cracks in the walls, crevices in box springs, and
furniture)
• Look for black spots on the mattress or blood traces on the sheets
ELIMINATION
• Contact a pest management company
• Wash clothes at 60°C (140°F) or freeze delicate clothing, vacuum,
and clean your home before the pest manager visits
• Collaborate with professionals who are used to dealing with bed
bug infestation to increase eradication efficacy

Fig. 709.2 Red-­brown papules in papular urticaria.
hypersensitivity reactions to insect bites—the predominant lesions in
the young and uninitiated—are characterized by firm, persistent papules
that may become hyperpigmented and are often excoriated and crusted.
Pruritus may be mild or severe, transient or persistent. A central punctum is usually visible but may disappear as the lesion ages or is scratched.
The immediate hypersensitivity reaction is characterized by an evanescent, erythematous wheal. If edema is marked, a tiny vesicle may surmount the wheal. Certain beetles produce bullous lesions through the
action of cantharidin, and various insects, including beetles and spiders,
may cause hemorrhagic nodules and ulcers. Bites on the lower extremities are more likely to be severe or persistent or become bullous than
those located elsewhere. Complications of arthropod bites include development of impetigo, folliculitis, cellulitis, lymphangitis, and severe anaphylactic hypersensitivity reactions, particularly after the bite of certain
hymenopterans. The histopathologic changes are variable, depending on
the arthropod, the age of the lesion, and the reactivity of the host. Acute
urticarial lesions tend to show central vesiculation in which eosinophils
are numerous. Papules most commonly show dermal edema and a mixed
superficial and deep perivascular inflammatory infiltrate, often including a number of eosinophils. At times, however, the dermal cellular infiltrate is so dense that a lymphoma is suspected. Many young children
demonstrate extensive dermal but nonerythematous, nontender edema
in response to mosquito bites (Skeeter syndrome), which responds to
oral antihistamines; this must be distinguished from cellulitis, which
tends to be painful, tender, and red. Retained mouthparts may stimulate
a foreign body type of granulomatous reaction.
Papular urticaria occurs principally in the first decade of life. It may
occur at any time of the year. The most common culprits are species
of fleas, mites, bed bugs, gnats, mosquitoes, chiggers, and animal lice.
Individuals with papular urticaria have predominantly transitional
lesions in various stages of evolution between delayed-­onset papules
and immediate-­onset wheals. The most characteristic lesion is an
edematous, red-­brown papule (Fig. 709.2). An individual lesion frequently starts as a wheal that, in turn, is replaced by a papule. A given
bite may incite an id reaction at distant sites of quiescent bites in the
form of erythematous macules, papules, or urticarial plaques. After a
season or two, the reaction progresses from a transitional to a primarily
immediate hypersensitivity urticarial reaction.
One of the most commonly encountered arthropod bites is that
resulting from human, cat, or dog fleas (family Pulicidae). Eggs, which
are generally laid in dusty areas and cracks between floorboards, give
rise to larvae that then form cocoons. The cocoon stage can persist for
up to 1 year, and the flea emerges in response to vibrations from footsteps, accounting for the assaults that frequently befall the new owners of a recently reopened dwelling. Adult dog fleas can live without
a blood meal for approximately 60 days. Attacks from fleas are more
likely to occur when the fleas do not have access to their usual host;
cat or dog fleas are more voracious and problematic when one visits an
area frequented by the pet than when the pet is encountered directly.
Flea bites tend to be grouped in lines or irregular clusters on the lower
extremities. Fleas are often not seen on the body of a pet. Diagnosis of

PREVENTION
• Carefully examine secondhand furniture to assure the absence of
bed bugs before purchase so as not to contaminate your home
• When sleeping in a hotel, even an upmarket establishment, lift
mattresses to look for bed bugs or black spots
• Do not leave luggage in dark places, near furniture, or close to
your bed. Before going to bed, close suitcases and put them in
the bathroom—in the bathtub or shower stall
From Bernardeschi C, Le Cleach L, Delaunay P, Chosidow O. Bed bug infestation
[published correction appears in BMJ. 2013;346:F1044]. BMJ. 2013;346:f138.

flea bites is aided by examination of debris from the animal’s bedding
material. The debris is collected by shaking the bedding into a plastic
bag and examining the contents for fleas or their eggs, larvae, or feces.

TREATMENT

Treatment is directed at alleviation of pruritus by oral antihistamines
and cool compresses. Potent topical corticosteroids are helpful. Topical
antihistamines are potent immunologic sensitizers and have no role in
the treatment of insect bite reactions. A short course of systemic steroids may be helpful if many severe reactions occur, particularly around
the eyes. Insect repellents containing N,N-­diethyl-­3-­methylbenzamide
(DEET) may afford moderate protection against mosquitoes, fleas,
flies, chiggers, and ticks, but are relatively ineffective against wasps,
bees, and hornets. DEET must be applied to exposed skin and clothing to be effective. The most effective protection against mosquitoes,
the human body louse, and other blood-­feeding arthropods is the
use of DEET and permethrin-­impregnated clothing. However, these
measures are not effective against the phlebotomine sand fly, which
transmits leishmaniasis. Because of the potential for toxicity, the lowest
effective DEET dose should be selected. Additional insect repellents
include picaridin (flies, mosquitoes, chiggers, ticks), IR3535 (mosquitoes), oil of lemon, eucalyptus (mosquitoes), and citronella (mosquitoes). Table 709.2 lists methods to eliminate bed bugs.
An effort should be made to identify and eradicate the etiologic agent.
Pets should be carefully inspected. Crawl spaces, eaves, and other sites
of the house or outbuildings frequented by animals and birds should be
decontaminated, and baseboard crevices, mattresses, rugs, furniture,
and animal sleeping quarters should be decontaminated. Agents that
are effective for ridding the home of fleas include lindane, pyrethroids,
and organic thiocyanates. Flea-­infested pets may be treated with powders containing rotenone, pyrethroids, malathion, or methoxychlor.
Lufenuron, an agent that prevents fleas from reproducing, is effective
for animals in oral and injectable formulations. Fipronil is effective as a
topical agent for the prevention of flea infestation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

709.2 Scabies
Lamiaa Hamie and Stephen R. Humphrey
Scabies is caused by burrowing and release of toxic or antigenic substances by the female mite Sarcoptes scabiei var. hominis. The most

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4172 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 709.3  Different Presenting Forms of Scabies
PRESENTING FORMS OF
SCABIES

SPECIFIC HIGH-­RISK
POPULATIONS

Classic scabies (scabies vulgaris)

Infants and children; sexually
active adults; men who have sex
with men

Intense generalized pruritus,
worse at night; inflammatory
pruritic papules localized to
finger webs, flexor aspects of
wrists, elbows, axillae, buttocks,
genitalia, female breasts; lesions
and pruritus spare the face,
head, and neck; secondary
lesions include eczematization,
excoriation, impetigo

Dermatitis herpetiformis, drug
reactions, eczema, pediculosis
corporis, lichen planus, pityriasis
rosea

Scalp scabies

Infants and children;
institutionalized older adults;
AIDS patients; patients with
preexisting crusted scabies

Atypical crusted papular lesions of
the scalp, face, palms, and soles

Dermatomyositis, ringworm,
seborrheic dermatitis

Crusted scabies (Norwegian
scabies, scabies norvegica,
scabies crustosa)

Institutionalized older
adults; institutionalized
developmentally disabled
(Down syndrome); unhoused
persons, especially HIV-­positive;
all immunocompromised
patients, particularly those
with AIDS or positive for HIV or
HTLV-­1; transplant recipients;
patients on prolonged
systemic corticosteroids and
chemotherapy

Psoriasiform hyperkeratotic
papular lesions of the scalp,
face, neck, hands, feet, with
extensive nail involvement;
eczematization and impetigo
common

Contact dermatitis, drug
reactions, eczema,
erythroderma, ichthyosis,
psoriasis

Nodular scabies

Sexually active adults; men who
have sex with men; HIV-­positive
men > HIV-­positive women

Violaceous pruritic nodules
localized to male genitalia,
groin, axillae, representing
hypersensitivity reaction to mite
antigens

Acropustulosis, atopic dermatitis,
Darier disease, lupus
erythematosus, lymphomatoid
papulosis, papular urticaria,
necrotizing vasculitis, secondary
syphilis

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

LIMITED DIFFERENTIAL
DIAGNOSES

HTLV-­1, Human T-­cell lymphotropic virus type 1.
From Bennett JE, Blaser MJ, Dolin R, et al., eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2015: Table 295.1, p.
3252.

important factor that determines spread of scabies is the extent and duration of physical contact with an affected individual. Children and sexual
partners of affected individuals are most at risk. Scabies is transmitted
only rarely by fomites because the isolated mite dies within 2-­3 days.

ETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

An adult female mite measures approximately 0.4 mm in length; has four
sets of legs; and has a hemispheric body marked by transverse corrugations,
brown spines, and bristles on the dorsal surface. A male mite is approximately half her size and is similar in configuration. After impregnation on
the skin surface, a gravid female exudes a keratolytic substance and burrows into the stratum corneum, often forming a shallow well within 30
minutes. She gradually extends this tract by 0.5-­5.0 mm/24 hours along
the boundary with the stratum granulosum. She deposits 10-­25 oval eggs
and numerous brown fecal pellets (scybala) daily. When egg laying is completed, in 4-­5 weeks, she dies within the burrow. The eggs hatch in 3-­5
days, releasing larvae that move to the skin surface to molt into nymphs.
Maturity is achieved in approximately 2-­3 weeks. Mating occurs, and the
gravid female invades the skin to complete the life cycle.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

In an immunocompetent host, scabies is frequently heralded by intense
pruritus, particularly at night (Table 709.3). The first sign of the infestation often consists of 1-­to 2-­mm red papules, some of which are excoriated, crusted, or scaling. Threadlike burrows are the classic lesion of
scabies (Figs. 709.3 and 709.4) but may not be seen in infants. In infants,
bullae and pustules are relatively common. The eruption may also include
wheals, papules, vesicles, and a superimposed eczematous dermatitis (Fig. 709.5). The palms, soles, and scalp are often affected. In older

Fig. 709.3 Classic scabies burrow.
children and adolescents, the clinical pattern is similar to that in adults,
in whom preferred sites are the interdigital spaces; wrist flexors; anterior
axillary folds; ankles, buttocks, umbilicus and belt line; groin; genitals in
men; and areolas in women. The head, neck, palms, and soles are generally spared. Infants will often have a diffuse eczematous eruption that will
involve the scalp, neck, and face. Red-­brown nodules, most often located
in covered areas such as the axillae, groin, and genitals, predominate in
the less common variant called nodular scabies. Additional clues include
facial sparing, affected family members, poor response to topical antibiotics, and transient response to topical steroids. Untreated, scabies may lead
to eczematous dermatitis, impetigo, ecthyma, folliculitis, furunculosis,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 709 u Arthropod Bites and Infestations 4173
cellulitis, lymphangitis, and id reaction. Glomerulonephritis has developed
in children from streptococcal impetiginization of scabies lesions. In some
tropical areas, scabies is the predominant underlying cause of pyoderma. A
latent period of approximately 1 month follows an initial infestation. Thus
itching may be absent and lesions may be relatively inapparent in contacts
who are asymptomatic carriers. However, on reinfestation, reactions to
mite antigens are noted within hours.

seborrheic dermatitis, and the less common bullous disorders of childhood may be suspected in infants with predominantly bullous lesions.
Nodular scabies is frequently misdiagnosed as urticaria pigmentosa
and Langerhans cell histiocytosis. The histopathologic appearance of
nodular scabies, consisting of a deep, dense, perivascular infiltrate of
lymphocytes, histiocytes, plasma cells, and atypical mononuclear cells,
may mimic malignant lymphoid neoplasms.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

TREATMENT

The differential diagnosis of scabies can often be made clinically but is
confirmed by microscopic identification of mites (Fig. 709.6A), ova, and
scybala (see Fig. 709.6B) in epithelial debris. Scrapings most often test
positive when obtained from burrows or fresh papules. A reliable method
is application of a drop of mineral oil on the selected lesion, scraping of it
with a No. 15 blade, and transferring the oil and scrapings to a glass slide.
The differential diagnosis depends on the types of lesions present.
Burrows are virtually pathognomonic for human scabies. Papulovesicular lesions are confused with papular urticaria, canine scabies,
chickenpox, viral exanthems, drug eruptions, dermatitis herpetiformis,
and folliculitis. Eczematous lesions may mimic atopic dermatitis and

The treatment of choice for scabies is permethrin 5% cream (Elimite)
applied to the entire body from the neck down, with particular attention
to intensely involved areas, which is also standard therapy (Table 709.4).
Scabies is frequently found above the neck in infants (younger than 2

A

Fig. 709.4 Scabies. Felt-­tipped ink pen has penetrated and high-

lighted a burrow. The ink is retained after the surface is wiped clean
with an alcohol swab. (From Habif TP, ed. Clinical Dermatology, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Mosby; 2016: Fig 15-­16.)

B
Fig. 709.6 A, Human scabies mite obtained from scraping. B, Scabies
ova and scybala.

Fig. 709.5 A, Diffuse scabies on an

A

B

infant. The face is clear. The lesions
are most numerous around the axillae, chest, and abdomen. B, Scabies.
Infestation of the palms and soles is
common in infants. The vesicular lesions have all ruptured. (From Habif
TP, ed. Clinical Dermatology, 4th ed.
Philadelphia: Mosby; 2004: Figs. 15.8
and 15.9.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4174 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 709.4  Currently Recommended Treatment for Scabies
FDA
­ PPROVED?
A

PREGNANCY
CATEGORY*

DOSING SCHEDULE

SAFETY PROFILE

CONTRAINDICATIONS

5% Permethrin
cream (Actin,
Nix, Elimite)

Yes

B

Apply from neck down; wash
off after 8-­14 hr; good
residual activity, but second
application recommended
after 1 wk

Excellent; itching and
stinging on application

Prior allergic reactions;
infants <2 mo of age;
breastfeeding

1% Lindane lotion
or cream

Yes

B

Apply 30-­60 mL from neck
down; wash off after 8-­
12 hr; no residual activity;
increasing drug resistance

Potential for central nervous
system toxicity from
organochloride poisoning,
usually manifesting as
seizures, with overapplication
and ingestions

Preexisting seizure
disorder; infants
and children <6 mo
of age; pregnancy;
breastfeeding

10% Crotamiton
cream or lotion
(Eurax)

Yes

C

Apply from neck down on 2
consecutive nights; wash
off 24 hr after second
application

Excellent; not very effective;
exacerbates pruritus

None

2–10% Sulfur
in petrolatum
ointments

No

C

Apply for 2-­3 days, then wash

Excellent; not very effective

Preexisting sulfur allergy

10–25% Benzoyl
benzoate lotion

No

None

Two applications for 24 hr
with 1-­day to 1-­wk interval

Irritant; exacerbates pruritus;
can induce contact irritant
dermatitis and pruritic
cutaneous xerosis

Preexisting eczema

0.5% Malathion
lotion (Ovide),
1% malathion
shampoo
(unavailable
in the United
States)

No

B

95% ovicidal; rapid (5 min)
killing; good residual
activity; increasing drug
resistance

Flammable 78% isopropyl
alcohol vehicle stings
eyes, skin, mucosa;
increasing drug resistance;
organophosphate poisoning
risk with overapplication and
ingestions

Infants and children <6 mo
of age; pregnancy;
breastfeeding

Ivermectin
(Stromectol)

Yes

C

200-­μg/kg single PO dose,
may be repeated in 14-­15
days; not ovicidal, second
dose on day 14 or 15
highly recommended;
recommended for endemic
or epidemic scabies in
institutions and refugee
camps

Excellent; may cause nausea
and vomiting; take on
empty stomach with water

Safety in pregnancy
uncertain; probably safe
during breastfeeding;
not recommended for
children younger than
5 yr of age or weighing
<15 kg

SCABICIDES

*U.S. Food and Drug Administration safety in pregnancy categories: A, safety established; B, presumed safe; C, uncertain safety; D, unsafe; X, highly unsafe.
From Bennett JE, Blaser MJ, Dolin R, et al., eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2015: Table 295.2, p. 3253.

years old), necessitating treatment of the scalp. The medication is left on
the skin for 8-­12 hours and should be reapplied in 1 week for another 8-­
to 12-­hour period. Additional therapies include sulfur ointment 5–10%,
and crotamiton 10% lotion or cream. Lindane 1% lotion or cream should
only be used as an alternative therapy, given the risk of systemic toxicity.
For severe infestations or in immunocompromised patients, ivermectin
200 μg/kg per dose given orally for two doses 2 weeks apart can be used
(off-­label use). Single-­dose ivermectin (200 μg/kg) has also been effective
in immunocompetent patients, with improvement (cure) noted in 60%
at 2 weeks and 89% at 4 weeks after treatment (see Table 709.4).
Transmission of mites is unlikely more than 24 hours after treatment. Pruritus, which is a result of hypersensitivity to mite antigens,
may persist for a number of days to weeks, and may be alleviated by
a topical corticosteroid preparation. If pruritus persists for >2 weeks
after treatment and new lesions are occurring, the patient should be
reexamined for mites. Nodules are extremely resistant to treatment
and may take several months to resolve. The entire family should be
treated, as should caretakers of the infested child. Clothing, bed linens,
and towels should be washed in hot water and dried using high heat.
Clothing or other items (e.g., stuffed animals) that cannot be washed
may be dry cleaned or stored in bags for 3 days to 1 week, as the mite
will die when separated from the human host.

CRUSTED SCABIES

The Norwegian variant of human scabies is highly contagious and
occurs mainly in individuals who are cognitively and physically debilitated, particularly those who are institutionalized and those with Down
syndrome; in patients with poor cutaneous sensation (leprosy, spina
bifida); in patients who have severe systemic illness (leukemia, diabetes); and in immunosuppressed patients (HIV infection). Affected
individuals are infested by a myriad of mites that inhabit the crusts
and exfoliating scales of the skin and scalp (Fig. 709.7). The nails may
become thickened and dystrophic. The subungual debris is densely
populated by mites. The infestation is often accompanied by generalized lymphadenopathy and eosinophilia. There is massive orthokeratosis and parakeratosis with numerous interspersed mites, psoriasiform
epidermal hyperplasia, foci of spongiosis, and neutrophilic abscesses.
Norwegian scabies is thought to represent a deficient host immune
response to the organism. Management is difficult, requiring scrupulous isolation measures, removal of the thick scales, and repeated
but careful applications of permethrin 5% cream. Ivermectin (200-­250
μg/kg) has been used successfully as single-­dose therapy in refractory
cases, particularly in HIV-­infected patients. A second dose may be
needed a week later. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has not
approved this agent for the treatment of scabies.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 709 u Arthropod Bites and Infestations 4175

Fig. 709.7 Norwegian scabies. A and B,

A

B

CANINE SCABIES

Canine scabies is caused by S. scabiei var. canis, the dog mite that is
associated with mange. The eruption in humans, which is most frequently acquired by cuddling an infested puppy, consists of tiny papules, vesicles, wheals, and excoriated eczematous plaques. Burrows are
not present because the mite infrequently inhabits human stratum corneum. The rash is pruritic and has a predilection for the arms, chest,
and abdomen, the usual sites of contact with dogs. Onset is sudden and
usually follows exposure by 1-­10 days, possibly resulting from development of a hypersensitivity reaction to mite antigens. Recovery of mites
or ova from scrapings of human skin is rare. The disease is self-­limited
because humans are not a suitable host. Bathing and changing clothes
are generally sufficient. Removal or treatment of the infested animal is
necessary. Symptomatic therapy for itching is helpful. In rare cases in
which mites are demonstrated in scrapings from an affected child, they
can be eradicated by the same measures applicable to human scabies.

OTHER TYPES OF SCABIES

Other mites that occasionally bite humans include the chigger or harvest mite (Eutrombicula alfreddugesi), which prefers to live on grass,
shrubs, vines, and stems of grain. Larvae have hooked mouthparts,
which allow the chigger to attach to the skin, but not to burrow, to
obtain a blood meal, most commonly on the lower legs. Avian mites
may affect those who come into close contact with chickens or pet gerbils. Humans may occasionally be assaulted by avian mites that have
infested a nest outside a window, an attic, heating vents, or an air conditioner. The dermatitis is variable, including grouped papules, wheals,
and vesicular lesions on the wrists, neck, breasts, umbilicus, and anterior axillary folds. A prolonged investigation is often undertaken before
the cause and source of the dermatitis are discovered.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

709.3 Pediculosis
Lamiaa Hamie and Stephen R. Humphrey
Three types of lice are obligate parasites of the human host: body or
clothing lice (Pediculus humanus corporis), head lice (Pediculus humanus capitis), and pubic or crab lice (Phthirus pubis). Only the body louse
serves as a vector of human disease (typhus, trench fever, relapsing
fever). Body and head lice have similar physical characteristics. They are
approximately 2-­4 mm in length. Pubic lice are only 1-­2 mm in length
and are greater in width than in length, giving them a crablike appearance. Female lice live for approximately 1 month and deposit 3-­10 eggs
daily on the human host. However, body lice generally lay eggs in or near
the seams of clothing. The ova or nits are glued to hairs or fibers of clothing but not directly on the body. Ova hatch in 1-­2 weeks and require
another week to mature. Once the eggs hatch, the nits remain attached to
the hair as empty sacs of chitin. Freshly hatched larvae die unless a meal
is obtained within 24 hours and every few days thereafter. Both nymphs

Right side of the head and neck and right
leg before treatment showing diffuse,
scaly hyperkeratotic rash, crusts, and fissures with areas of skin erythema (arrow)
caused by hyperinfestation after infection
with Sarcoptes scabiei in a patient with
Down syndrome. (Modified from Lee K,
Heresi G, Hammond RA. Norwegian scabies in a patient with Down syndrome. J
Pediatr. 2019;209:253.)

and adult lice feed on human blood, injecting their salivary juices into
the host and depositing their fecal matter on the skin. Symptoms of infestation do not appear immediately but develop as an individual becomes
sensitized. The hallmark of all types of pediculosis is pruritus.
Pediculosis corporis is rare in children except under conditions of poor
hygiene, especially in colder climates when the opportunity to change
clothes on a regular basis is lacking. The parasite is transmitted mainly on
contaminated clothing or bedding. The primary lesion is a small, intensely
pruritic, red macule or papule with a central hemorrhagic punctum,
located on the shoulders, trunk, or buttocks. Additional lesions include
excoriations, wheals, and eczematous, secondarily infected plaques. Massive infestation may be associated with constitutional symptoms of fever,
malaise, and headache. Chronic infestation may lead to “vagabond’s skin,”
which manifests as lichenified, scaling, hyperpigmented plaques, most
commonly on the trunk. Lice are found on the skin only transiently when
they are feeding. At other times, they inhabit the seams of clothing. Nits
are attached firmly to fibers in the cloth and may remain viable for up to
1 month. Nits hatch when they encounter warmth from the host’s body
when the clothes are worn again. Therapy consists of improved hygiene
and hot water laundering of all infested clothing and bedding. A uniform
temperature of 65°C (149°F), wet or dry, for 15-­30 minutes kills all eggs
and lice. Alternatively, eggs hatch and nymphs starve if clothing is stored
for 2 weeks at 23.9–29.4°C (75–85°F).
Pediculosis capitis is an intensely pruritic infestation of lice in the
scalp hair. It is the most common form of lice to affect children, in particular those between the ages of 3 and 12 years. Fomites and head-­to-­
head contact are important modes of transmission. In summer months
in many areas of the United States and in the tropics at all times of the
year, shared combs, brushes, or towels have a more important role in
louse transmission. Translucent 0.5-­mm eggs are laid near the proximal portion of the hair shaft and become adherent to one side of the
shaft (Fig. 709.8). A nit cannot be moved along or knocked off the hair
shaft with the fingers. Secondary pyoderma, after trauma from scratching, may result in matting together of the hair and cervical and occipital lymphadenopathy. Hair loss does not result from pediculosis but
may accompany the secondary pyoderma. Head lice are a major cause
of numerous pyodermas of the scalp, particularly in tropical environments. Lice are not always visible, but nits are detectable on the hairs,
most commonly in the occipital region and above the ears, rarely on
beard or pubic hair. Dermatitis may also be noted on the neck and pinnae. An id reaction, consisting of erythematous patches and plaques,
may develop, particularly on the trunk.
In cases of resistance (which is common) of head lice to pyrethroids,
malathion 0.5% in isopropanol is the treatment of choice and should
be applied to dry hair until hair and scalp are wet and left on for 12
hours. A second application 7-­9 days after the initial treatment may
be necessary. This product is flammable, so care should be taken to
avoid open flames. Malathion, like lindane shampoo, is not indicated
for use in neonates and infants; however, additional approved therapies
include spinosad (if >6 months), benzyl alcohol lotion (if >6 months),
and ivermectin for difficult-­to-­treat head lice (Table 709.5). All household members should be treated at the same time. Nits can be removed

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4176 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 709.8 Phthiriasis palpebrarum. Dermoscopy examination of eyelashes in a 27-­mo-­old boy, showing nits and parasites (arrow). (From Ouedraogo M, Ventejou S, Leducq S, et al. Crusts on the eyelashes. J Pediatr. 2019;209:254.)

Table 709.5  Drugs for Head Lice

DRUG

RESISTANCE

FDA-­APPROVED
LOWER AGE OR
WEIGHT LIMIT

DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION

COST*/SIZE

Ivermectin 0.5% lotion—
Sklice (Arbor)

No

6 mo

Apply to dry hair and scalp for 10 min,
then rinse†

$297.60/4 oz

Ivermectin tablets‡—
Stromectol (MSD)

No

15 kg§

200-­400 μg/kg PO once; repeat 7-­10
days later

$9.30#

Spinosad 0.9%
suspension—Natroba
(ParaPro)

No

6 mo

Apply to dry hair for 10 min, then
rinse; repeat 7 days later if
necessary¶

$246.10/4 oz

Benzyl alcohol 5% lotion—
Ulesfia (Lachlan)

No

6 mo

Apply to dry hair for 10 min, then
rinse; repeat 7 days later**

$181.30/8 oz

Pyrethrins with piperonyl
butoxide shampoo‡—
Generic Rid (Bayer)

Yes

2 yr

Apply to dry hair for 10 min, then
shampoo; repeat 7-­10 days later

$15.00/8 oz‡‡
$20.00/8 oz‡‡

Permethrin 1% creme
rinse‡—Generic Nix
(Insight)

Yes

2 mo

Apply to shampooed, towel-­dried
hair for 10 min, then rinse; repeat 7
days later

$18.00/4 oz‡‡
$21.00/4 oz‡‡

Malathion 0.5% lotion—
Generic Ovide (Taro)

Not in the United
States

6 yr§§

Apply to dry hair for 8-­12 hr, then
shampoo; repeat 7-­9 days later if
necessary##,¶¶

$221.70/2 oz
$246.40/2 oz

Abametapir lotion 0.74%
(Xeglyze)

No

6 mo

Apply to dry hair for 10 min on
day 0 and then rinse with water

Not available yet

*Approximate WAC for the indicated size. WAC represents a published catalogue or list price and may not represent an actual transactional price. Source: AnalySource Monthly.
November 5, 2016. Reprinted with permission by First Databank, Inc. All rights reserved. Copyright 2016. www.fdbhealth.com/policies/drug-­pricing-­policy. Total cost of treatment
may vary based on hair length and number of applications required to completely eradicate lice.
†The manufacturer recommends using up to one single-­use, 4-­oz tube of topical ivermectin lotion per application.
‡Not FDA approved for treatment of head lice.
§The safety and effectiveness of oral ivermectin have not been established in children weighing <15 kg.
#Cost of two 3-­mg tablets (one dose for a 30-­kg child at the lowest dosage).
¶The manufacturer recommends using up to one 4-­oz (120-­mL) bottle of spinosad 0.9% suspension per application.
**The amount of benzoyl alcohol 5% lotion recommended per application depends on hair length.
‡‡Approximate cost according to Walgreens.com. Accessed November 10, 2016.
§§The safety and effectiveness of malathion lotion have not been established in children <6 yr old; it is contraindicated in children <24 mo old.
##In clinical trials, patients used a maximum of 2 fl oz of malathion lotion per application.
¶¶One or two 20-­min applications have also been effective (Meinking TL, Vicaria M, Eyerdam DH, et al: Efficacy of a reduced application time of Ovide lotion [0.5% malathion]
compared to Nix creme rinse [1% permethrin] for the treatment of head lice. Pediatr Dermatol 21:670–674, 2004.)
††Available without a prescription.
FDA, U.S. Food and Drug Administration; MSD, Merck Sharp Dohme; WAC, wholesaler acquisition cost or manufacturer’s published price to wholesalers.
From The Medical Letter. Drugs for head lice. Med Lett Drugs Ther. 2016;58:150–152.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 710 u Acne

4177

709.4 Seabather’s Eruption
Lamiaa Hamie and Stephen R. Humphrey
Seabather’s eruption is a severely pruritic dermatosis of inflammatory
papules that develops within about 12 hours of bathing in saltwater,
primarily on body sites that were covered by a bathing suit. The eruption has been described primarily in connection with bathing in the
waters of Florida and the Caribbean. Lesions, which may include pustules, vesicles, and urticarial plaques, are more numerous in individuals who keep their bathing suits on for an extended period after leaving
the water. The eruption may be accompanied by systemic symptoms
of fatigue, malaise, fever, chills, nausea, and headache; in one large
series, ∼40% of children younger than 16 years of age had fever. Duration of the pruritus and skin eruption is 1-­2 weeks. Lesions consist of a
superficial and deep perivascular and interstitial infiltrate of lymphocytes, eosinophils, and neutrophils. The eruption appears to be caused
by an allergic hypersensitivity reaction to venom from larvae of the
thimble jellyfish (Linuche unguiculata). Treatment is largely symptomatic. Potent topical corticosteroids have been shown to provide relief to
some patients.

Fig. 709.9 Intact nits on human hairs.

Chapter 710
with a fine-­toothed comb after application of a damp towel to the scalp
for 30 minutes. Clothing and bed linens should be laundered in very
hot (54.4°C [>130°F]) water and then dried for at least 10 minutes at
the highest setting or dry-­cleaned; brushes and combs should be discarded or coated with a pediculicide for 15 minutes and then thoroughly cleaned in boiling water. If the object cannot be washed, it can
be sealed in a plastic bag for 48 hours. Children may return to school
after the initial treatment.
Pediculosis pubis is transmitted by skin-­to-­skin or sexual contact with an infested individual; the chance of acquiring the lice
with one sexual exposure is 95%. The infestation is usually encountered in adolescents, although small children may occasionally
acquire pubic lice on the eyelashes (see Fig. 709.8). Patients experience moderate to severe pruritus and may develop a secondary
pyoderma from scratching. Excoriations tend to be shallow, and
the incidence of secondary infection is lower than in pediculosis
corporis. Maculae ceruleae are steel-­gray spots, usually <1 cm in
diameter, which may appear in the pubic area and on the chest,
abdomen, and thighs. Oval translucent nits, which are firmly
attached to the hair shafts, may be visible to the naked eye or may
be readily identified by a hand lens or by microscopic examination
(Fig. 709.9). Grittiness, as a result of adherent nits, may sometimes
be detected when the fingers are run through infested hair. Adult
lice are more difficult to detect than head or body lice because of
their lower level of activity and smaller, translucent bodies. Because
pubic lice occasionally may wander or may be transferred to other
sites on fomites, terminal hair on the trunk, thighs, axillary region,
beard area, and eyelashes should be examined for nits. The coexistence of other venereal diseases should be considered. Treatment
with a 10-­minute application of a pyrethrin preparation is usually
effective. Retreatment may be required in 7-­10 days. Infestation of
eyelashes is eradicated by petrolatum applied 3-­5 times per 24 hours
for 8-­10 days. Clothing, towels, and bed linens may be contaminated with nit-­bearing hairs and should be thoroughly laundered
or dry-­cleaned.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Acne
Leah Lalor
ACNE VULGARIS

Acne is a chronic inflammatory disorder of the pilosebaceous unit with
a multifactorial pathogenesis that affects at least 85% of adolescents but
can occur in any age-­group.

Pathogenesis

There are four main pathogenic factors leading to the development of acne: (1) increased sebum production; (2) abnormal keratinization of the follicular infundibulum; (3) Cutibacterium acnes
(formerly Propionibacterium acnes)–mediated responses; and (4)
inflammation.
The initial lesion of acne is a microcomedone, which progresses
to a comedone. A comedone is a dilated, epithelium-­lined follicular
sac filled with lamellated keratinaceous material, lipid, and bacteria.
An open comedone, known as a blackhead, has a patulous pilosebaceous orifice that permits visualization of the plug. An open comedone becomes inflammatory less commonly than does a closed
comedone, or whitehead, which has only a pinpoint opening. An
inflammatory papule or nodule develops from a comedone that
has ruptured and extruded its follicular contents into the subadjacent dermis, inducing a neutrophilic inflammatory response. If the
inflammatory reaction is close to the surface, a papule or pustule
develops. If the inflammatory infiltrate develops deeper in the dermis, a nodule forms. Suppuration and an occasional giant cell reaction to keratin and hair are the cause of nodulocystic lesions. These
are not true cysts but liquefied masses of inflammatory debris.
Comedonal acne (Fig. 710.1), particularly of the forehead and
central face, is frequently the first sign of pubertal maturation. Most
patients with acne do not have endocrine abnormalities. Many
women with acne (25–50%) note acne flares about 1 week before
menstruation.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4178 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 710.2 Inflammatory papules and pustules.

Fig. 710.1 Primarily comedonal acne in a 7-­yr-­old female.

Clinical Manifestations

Acne vulgaris is characterized by four basic types of lesions: open
and closed comedones, papules, pustules (Fig. 710.2), and nodulocystic lesions (Fig. 710.3 and Table 710.1). One or more types of
lesions may predominate. In its mildest form, which is often seen
early in adolescence, lesions are limited to comedones on the central area of the face. Lesions may also involve the chest, upper back,
and deltoid areas. A predominance of lesions on the forehead, particularly closed comedones, is common in early acne but can also
be seen with prolonged use of greasy hair preparations (pomade
acne) (Fig. 710.4). Marked involvement on the trunk is most often
seen in males. Lesions often heal with temporary postinflammatory
erythema and hyperpigmentation. Pitted, atrophic, or hypertrophic
scars may be interspersed, depending on the severity, depth, and
chronicity of the process.
Diagnosis of acne is rarely difficult, although flat warts, folliculitis,
and other types of acne (drug-­induced or exacerbated: glucocorticoid
agents, anabolic steroids, gold, dactinomycin, isoniazid, iodides, bromides, cyclosporin, interferon beta, epidermal growth factor inhibitors, lithium, phenobarbital, phenytoin, progestins/Depo-­
Provera)
may be confused with acne vulgaris. Definable autoinflammatory
syndromes and androgen excess disorders are often associated with
difficult-­to-­treat acne or when acne is noted with other cutaneous or
systemic symptoms (Fig. 710.5). The differential diagnosis includes
sarcoidosis, angiofibromas, keratosis pilaris, chloracne, rosacea, and
fibrofolliculomas.

Treatment

An effective treatment strategy targets multiple pathogenic factors. There is no single treatment that addresses all four pathogenic
factors other than the systemic retinoid isotretinoin; thus a combination approach is typically preferred. Therapy must be individualized based on acne lesion assessment and severity and aimed
at preventing comedone formation. Inflammatory acne is frequently
underdiagnosed in people of color, as the characteristic erythema
may be masked by darker skin pigment. Careful evaluation of acne
type is warranted to ensure appropriate treatment is selected.
Initial control requires 10-­12 weeks of regular daily use of
medications. Acne can be controlled and severe scarring prevented
by judicious maintenance therapy that is continued until the disease
process has abated spontaneously (Table 710.2 and Fig. 710.6).
It is also important to address the potentially severe emotional
impact of acne on adolescents. The pediatrician must be aware of the
frequently poor correlation between acne severity and psychosocial
impact, particularly in adolescents. As adolescents become preoccupied with their appearance, offering treatment even to the youngster
whose acne is mild may enhance self-­image.

Fig. 710.3 Severe nodulocystic acne.

Table 710.1  One Approach to the Classification of Acne
SEVERITY

DESCRIPTION

Mild

Comedones (noninflammatory lesions) are
the main lesions. Papules and pustules
may be present but are small and few in
number (generally <10).

Moderate

Moderate numbers of papules and pustules
(10-­40) and comedones (10-­40) are
present. Mild disease of the back and
trunk may also be present.

Moderately severe

Numerous papules and pustules are present
(40-­100), usually with many comedones
(40-­100) and occasional larger, deeper
nodular inflammatory lesions (up to 5).
Widespread affected areas usually involve
the face, chest, and back.

Severe

Nodulocystic acne and conglobate acne,
including many large inflammatory, painful
nodular or pustular lesions along with
many smaller papules, pustules, and
comedones.

The American Academy of Dermatology acknowledges that there is no universally
agreed upon grading/severity classification for acne.
Modified from James WD. Clinical practice: Acne. N Engl J Med. 2005;352:1463–1472.

Diet

Little evidence shows that the ingestion of particular foods can trigger
acne flares, though high nonfat milk ingestion and high-­glycemic-­load
diets may be contributory. When a patient is convinced that certain

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 710 u Acne
dietary items exacerbate acne, it is prudent for the patient to omit those
foods, provided that such omissions do not lead to excessive dietary
restrictions.

4179

Topical Therapy

All topical preparations must be used for 10-­12 weeks before their
effectiveness can be assessed (Table 710.3). Retinoids are first-­line
therapy and may be used alone for mild acne, but combination therapy
is frequently more effective. A popular and effective combination is
use of a benzoyl peroxide preparation in the morning and a retinoid at
night. Recommendations for specific acne presentations are presented
in Tables 710.2 and 710.3.
Retinoids. A topical retinoid should be the primary treatment for
acne vulgaris. Topical retinoids have multiple actions, including inhibition of the formation and number of microcomedones, reduction of
mature comedones, reduction of inflammatory lesions, and production
of normal desquamation of the follicular epithelium. Retinoids should
be applied nightly to all affected areas. The main side effects of retinoids
are irritation and dryness. Not all patients initially tolerate daily use
of a retinoid. It may be prudent to begin therapy every other or every
third day and slowly increase the frequency of application as tolerated.
Tretinoin, adapalene, tazarotene, and trifarotene (Table 710.4) are the
available retinoids. They vary in strength and efficacy, although adapalene tends to be less irritating and tazarotene is more irritating but
may be more effective.
Benzoyl Peroxide. Benzoyl peroxide is primarily an antimicrobial
agent and does have mild comedolytic activity. It has an advantage over
topical antibiotics in that it does not enhance antimicrobial resistance.
It is available in multiple formulations and concentrations. The gel formulations are preferred, owing to better stability and more consistent
release of the active ingredient. Washes and cleansers are useful for
covering large surface areas such as the chest and back. As with retinoids, the main side effects are irritation and drying. Benzoyl peroxide
can also bleach clothing, which sometimes limits the use of leave-­on
preparations like gels.
Topical Antibiotics. Topical antibiotics are indicated for the
treatment of inflammatory acne. Clindamycin is the most commonly used. It is not as effective as oral antibiotics. It should never
be used as monotherapy because it does not inhibit microcomedone
formation and has the potential to induce antimicrobial resistance.
Irritation and dryness are generally less than with retinoids or benzoyl peroxide. Topical antibiotics should not be used as monotherapy and can be prescribed as a combination product or separately.
The most common combination product is benzoyl peroxide/
clindamycin. A combination tretinoin/clindamycin product may
also be used.

Climate

Climate appears to influence acne in that improvement frequently
occurs in summer and flares are more common in winter. Remission in summer may relate partly to the relative absence of stress.
Emotional tension and fatigue seem to exacerbate acne in many
individuals; the mechanism is unclear but has been proposed to
relate to an increased adrenocortical response.

Cleansing

Cleansing with soap and water removes surface lipid and renders
the skin less oily in appearance. It is generally recommended to
wash with a gentle cleanser twice daily, followed by moisturizing
with a noncomedogenic emollient, for all acne patients. Repetitive
cleansing can be harmful because it irritates the skin, and use of
harsh scrubs is not recommended. Greasy cosmetic and hair preparations must be discontinued because they exacerbate preexisting
acne and cause further plugging of follicular pores. Manipulation
and squeezing of facial lesions can lead to scarring and should be
avoided.

Fig. 710.4 Pomade acne along the hairline.

Difficult-to-treat and rare forms of acne

Fig. 710.5 Rare and difficult forms of
“True” acne

Acneiform

Acne vulgaris

Acne variants

Acne in syndromes

• Not responding
• Acne conglobata

• Acne fulminans

• SAPHO
• PAPA
• PASH
• CAH
• PAC
• PAPASH
• SAHA
• HAIR-AN
• PCOS
• PASS

• Rosacea
• Demodicosis
• Perioral dermatitis
• Drug-induced acne (see text)
• Acne cosmetica
• Infection
• Cutaneous Iymphoma

acne. CAH, Congenital adrenal hyperplasia; PAPA, pyogenic sterile arthritis, pyoderma gangrenosum, acne syndrome;
PASH, pyoderma gangrenosum, acne,
and suppurative hidradenitis syndrome;
SAPHO, synovitis, acne, pustulosis, hyperostosis, osteitis syndrome; PAC, pyoderma gangrenosum, acne, ulcerative
colitis; PAPASH, pyogenic arthritis, pyoderma gangrenosum, acne, suppurative
hidradenitis; SAHA, seborrhea, acne, hirsutism, androgenic alopecia; HAIR-­
AN,
hyperandrogenism, insulin resistance,
acanthosis nigricans; PCOS, polycystic ovarian syndrome; PASS, pyoderma
gangrenosum acne, spondyloarthritis.
(Modified from Dessinioti C, Katsambas
A. Difficult and rare forms of acne. Clin
Dermatol. 2017;35[2]:138–146.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4180 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 710.2  Acne Treatment Algorithm
SEVERITY (LESION TYPE)
MILD
(COMEDONAL)

THERAPY

MILD
(INFLAMMATORY/
MIXED)

MODERATE
(INFLAMMATORY/
MIXED)

SEVERE
(INFLAMMATORY/
MIXED)

SEVERE
(NODULAR/
SCARRING)

Initial therapy
options*,†

Topical retinoid
BP
Salicylic acid cleanser

BP/retinoid combo
BP/antibiotic combo
Antibiotic/retinoid
combo + BP

BP/retinoid combo
BP/antibiotic combo
± topical retinoid
Antibiotic/retinoid
combo + BP
± oral antibiotic

BP/retinoid combo +
oral antibiotic
BP/antibiotic combo
+ topical retinoid +
oral antibiotic
Antibiotic/retinoid
combo + BP + oral
antibiotic

Isotretinoin

Alternative therapy
options*,†,‡

Add BP or retinoid
if not already
prescribed
BP/antibiotic combo
BP/retinoid combo
Antibiotic/retinoid
combo

Substitute another
combo product
Add missing
component (e.g.,
topical retinoid, BP,
topical antibiotic)
Change type,
strength, or
formulation of
topical retinoid

Substitute another
combo product
Add missing
component (i.e.,
topical retinoid, BP,
topical antibiotic,
oral antibiotic)
Change type,
strength, or
formulation of
topical retinoid
Consider hormonal
therapy§ for female
patients
Consider oral
isotretinoin

Consider changing
oral antibiotic
Consider isotretinoin
Consider hormonal
therapy§ for female
patients

Consider hormonal
therapy§ for female
patients

Maintenance therapy

Topical retinoid or BP/
retinoid combo

Topical retinoid or BP/
retinoid combo

Topical retinoid or BP/
retinoid combo

Topical retinoid or BP/
retinoid combo

Topical retinoid or BP/
retinoid combo

*If combination products not available to patient, consider substitution of individual components as separate prescriptions.
†Topical dapsone may be considered in place of topical antibiotic.
‡If needed as determined by physician assessment and patient satisfaction.
§Combined oral contraceptive or oral spironolactone.
BP, Benzoyl peroxide.
Adapted from Zaenglein AL, Thiboutot DM. Expert committee recommendations for acne management. Pediatrics 2006;118(3):1188–1199; Thiboutot D, Gollnick H, Bettoli V, et al.
New insights into the management of acne: An update from the Global Alliance to Improve Outcomes in Acne Group. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2009;60:S1–50; Eichenfield LF, Krakowski
AC, Piggott C, et al. Evidence-­based recommendations for the diagnosis and treatment of pediatric acne. Pediatrics. 2013;131(3):S163–S186; Thiboutot DM, Gollnick HP. Treatment
considerations for inflammatory acne: Clinical evidence for adapalene 0.1% in combination therapies. J Drugs Dermatol. 2006;5(8):785–794; Gollnick H, Cunliffe W, Berson D, et al.
Management of acne: A report from a Global Alliance to Improve Outcomes in Acne. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2003;49(Suppl 1):S1–S37; and Zaenglein AL, Pathy AL, Schlosser BJ,
et al. Guidelines of care for the management of acne vulgaris. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2016;74:945–973. From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022, Table 8.1, p. 210.

Azelaic Acid. Azelaic acid (20% cream) has mild antimicrobial and
keratolytic properties. It can also help expedite resolution of postinflammatory hyperpigmentation and is less irritating than many other
topical acne treatments.
Clascoterone. Clascoterone 1% cream is a topical androgen antagonist, a first in its class, and is approved for use in males and females 12
years and older. It has shown efficacy in improving both inflammatory
and noninflammatory acne in trials, but how this medication will be
used under real-­world circumstances is yet to be determined.

Systemic Therapy

Antibiotics, especially tetracycline and its derivatives (see Table
710.4), are indicated for the treatment of patients whose acne has
not responded to topical medications, who have moderate to severe
inflammatory papulopustular and nodulocystic acne, and who have a
propensity for scarring (Table 710.5). Tetracycline and its derivatives
act by reducing the growth and metabolism of C. acnes. They also have
antiinflammatory properties. For most adolescent patients, therapy
may be initiated twice daily, for at least 6-­8 weeks, in combination with
a judicious topical regimen, and should not be used for longer than 3-­6
months. The drugs should always be administered in combination with
a topical retinoid and topical benzoyl peroxide but not with topical
antibiotics. Doxycycline is the preferred oral antibiotic in acne because
of its high efficacy and lower risk of long-­term side effects compared
with similar medications. Minocycline and doxycycline should be

taken with food. Side effects of tetracycline and derivatives are rare
and include vaginal candidiasis, particularly in those who take tetracycline concurrently with oral contraceptives; gastrointestinal irritation;
phototoxic reactions, including onycholysis and brown discoloration
of nails; esophageal ulceration; inhibition of fetal skeletal growth; and
staining of growing teeth, precluding its use during pregnancy and in
those younger than 8 years of age. Doxycycline is the most photosensitizing of the tetracycline derivatives and is also more likely to cause
pill esophagitis. Rarely, minocycline causes dizziness, intracranial
hypertension, bluish discoloration of the skin and mucous membranes,
hepatitis, a lupus-­like syndrome, and drug hypersensitivity. A possible
complication of prolonged systemic antibiotic use is proliferation of
gram-­negative organisms—particularly Enterobacter, Klebsiella, Escherichia coli, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa—producing severe refractory
folliculitis.
Females who have acne and hormonal abnormalities, whose acne
is unresponsive to antibiotic therapy, or who are not candidates for
isotretinoin therapy should be considered for a trial of hormonal
therapy. Combined oral contraceptive pills are the primary form of
hormonal therapy. Spironolactone has also shown effectiveness. Young
women with acne that is refractory to conventional therapy and have
other signs of hyperandrogenism should be evaluated for polycystic
ovarian syndrome.
Isotretinoin (13-­cis-­retinoic acid) is indicated for severe nodulocystic
acne and moderate to severe acne that has not responded to conventional

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 710 u Acne

4181

Global Alliance Acne Treatment Algorithm
Acne
severity

Moderate

Mild

Severe

Comedonal

Mixed and
papular/pustular

Mixed and
papular/pustular

Nodular

Nodular/conglobate

First choice

Topical
retinoid

Topical retinoid
 topical antimicrobial

Oral antibiotic
 topical retinoid
 BPO

Oral antibiotic
 topical retinoid
 BPO

Oral
isotretinoin

Alternatives

Alt. topical retinoid
or
azelaic acid
or
salicylic acid

Alt. topical retinoid
antimicrobial agent
 alt. topical retinoid
or
azelaic acid

Alt. oral antibiotic
 alt. topical retinoid
 BPO

Oral isotretinoin
or
alt. oral antibiotic
 alt. topical retinoid
 BPO/azelaic acid

High dose
oral antibiotic
 topical retinoid
 BPO

See first choice

Oral antiandrogen
 topical retinoid/
azelaic acid
 topical
antimicrobial

Oral antiandrogen
 topical retinoid/
 oral antibiotic
 alt. antimicrobial

High dose
oral antiandrogen
 topical retinoid
 alt. topical
antimicrobial

Alternatives for
females

Maintenance
therapy

See first choice

Topical retinoid

Topical retinoid  BPO

Fig. 710.6 Acne treatment algorithm. BPO, Benzoyl peroxide. (From Thiboutot D, Gollnick H; Global Alliance to Improve Acne, et al. New insights
into the management of acne: an update from the Global Allegiance to Improve Outcomes in Acne. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2009;60:S1–S50.)

Table 710.3  Recommendations for Topical Therapies
• Benzoyl peroxide or combinations with erythromycin or
clindamycin are effective acne treatments and are recommended
as monotherapy for mild acne, or in conjunction with a topical
retinoid, or systemic antibiotic therapy for moderate to severe
acne.
• Benzoyl peroxide is effective in the prevention of bacterial
resistance and is recommended for patients on topical or systemic
antibiotic therapy.
• Topical antibiotics (e.g., erythromycin and clindamycin) are
effective acne treatments but are not recommended as
monotherapy because of the risk of bacterial resistance.
• Topical retinoids are important in addressing the development
and maintenance of acne and are recommended as monotherapy
in primarily comedonal acne or in combination with topical or oral
antimicrobials in patients with mixed or primarily inflammatory
acne lesions.
• Treatment with multiple topical agents that affect different
aspects of acne pathogenesis can be useful. Combination therapy
should be used in the majority of patients with acne.
• Topical adapalene, tretinoin, and benzoyl peroxide can be safely
used in the management of preadolescent acne in children.
• Azelaic acid is a useful adjunctive acne treatment and
is recommended in the treatment of postinflammatory
dyspigmentation.
• Topical dapsone 5% gel is recommended for inflammatory acne,
particularly in adult females with acne.
• There is limited evidence to support recommendations for
sulfur, nicotinamide, resorcinol, sodium sulfacetamide, aluminum
chloride, and zinc in the treatment of acne.
From Zaenglein AL, Pathy AL, Scholsser BJ, et al. Guidelines of care for the
management of acne vulgaris. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2016;74(5):945–973, Table V, p. 951.

therapy. The recommended dosage is 0.5-­1.0 mg/kg/day. A standard
course in the United States lasts 16-­20 weeks or until acne is clear. At
the end of one course of isotretinoin, 70–80% of patients are cured,
10–20% need conventional topical and/or oral medications to maintain adequate control, and 10–20% have relapses and need an additional course of isotretinoin. Isotretinoin addresses all four pathogenic

mechanisms of acne, is highly effective, and only has very rare treatment failures.
Isotretinoin use has many side effects. It is highly teratogenic
and is absolutely contraindicated in pregnancy. Pregnancy should
be avoided for 4 weeks after discontinuation of therapy. Two forms
of birth control are required, or a confirmation of total abstinence,
as are monthly pregnancy tests. Concerns over cases of pregnancy
despite warnings have prompted a manufacturer registration program,
iPLEDGE (www.ipledgeprogram.com), which requires physician enrollment and careful patient pregnancy screening to prescribe isotretinoin.
Many patients also experience cheilitis, xerosis, periodic epistaxis, and
blepharoconjunctivitis. Increased serum triglyceride and cholesterol
levels are also common. It is important to rule out preexisting liver
disease and hyperlipidemia before initiating therapy and to recheck
laboratory values when the dosage is established. Less common but significant side effects include arthralgias, myalgias, temporary thinning
of the hair, paronychia, increased susceptibility to sunburn, formation
of pyogenic granulomas, and colonization of the skin with Staphylococcus aureus, leading to impetigo, secondarily infected dermatitis,
and scalp folliculitis. Rarely, hyperostotic lesions of the spine develop
after more than one course of isotretinoin. Concomitant use of an oral
tetracycline and isotretinoin is contraindicated because either drug,
but particularly when they are used together, can cause benign intracranial hypertension. Although no cause-­and-­effect relationship has
been established, drug-­induced mood changes and depression and/or
suicide have mandated close attention to psychiatric well-­being before
and during isotretinoin prescription. An increased risk of inflammatory bowel disease with the use of isotretinoin is debated.

Surgical Therapy

Intralesional injection of low-­dose (3-­5 mg/mL) midpotency glucocorticoids (e.g., triamcinolone) with a 30-­gauge needle on a tuberculin syringe may hasten the healing of individual painful nodulocystic
lesions. Dermabrasion or laser peel to minimize scarring should be
considered only after the active process is quiescent. Figure 710.7
describes the management of scarring.
The role of pulsed dye laser in the treatment of inflammatory acne is
controversial and inconclusive.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4182 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 710.4  Medications for the Treatment of Acne
DRUG

DOSE

SIDE EFFECTS

OTHER CONSIDERATIONS

Applied once nightly; strengths of
0.025–0.1% available*

Irritation (redness and scaling)

Generics available.

Adapalene

Applied once daily, at night or in
the morning; 0.1% and 0.3%*

Minimal irritation

0.1% generic available.

Tazarotene†

Applied once nightly; 0.05% and
0.1%*

Irritation

Limited data suggest tazarotene is
more effective than alternatives.

Trifarotene

Applied once nightly; 0.005%
cream

Mild irritation

Labeled for trunk use.

Antimicrobials
Benzoyl peroxide, 2.5–10%

Applied once or twice daily

Benzoyl peroxide can bleach
clothing and bedding

Available over the counter; 2.5–5%
concentrations as effective
as and less drying than 10%
concentration.

Clindamycin, erythromycin‡

Applied once or twice daily

Propensity to resistance

Most effective for inflammatory
lesions (rather than comedones);
resistance a concern when used
alone.

Minocycline

Applied once or twice daily; 4%
foam

None

Brand name, expensive.

Combination benzoyl
peroxide and clindamycin or
erythromycin; combination
tretinoin and clindamycin

Applied once or twice daily

Side effects from benzoyl
peroxide (bleach clothing or
bedding) and from topical
antibiotics (propensity to
resistance)

Combination more effective than
topical antibiotics alone; limits
development of resistance;
use of individual products in
combination less expensive and
appears similarly effective.

Other Topical Agents
Azelaic acid‡

Applied twice daily; 20% cream

Well tolerated

Helpful for postinflammatory
dyspigmentation; 10% cream
available over the counter

Salicylic acid

Applied once or twice daily

Peeling, irritation

Low efficacy

Dapsone

Applied once daily; 5% and 7.5%
gel

Mild irritation

Evidence of particular efficacy in
skin of color

Clascoterone

Applied twice daily; 1% cream

Mild irritation

Brand name, expensive.

ORAL ANTIBIOTICS§
Tetracycline#

250-­500 mg once or twice daily

Gastrointestinal upset, intracranial
hypertension

Inexpensive; dosing limited by
need to take on empty stomach.

Doxycycline#

50-­100 mg once or twice daily

Phototoxicity, intracranial
hypertension, pill esophagitis,
gastrointestinal upset

20-­mg dose antiinflammatory
only; limited data on efficacy.

Minocycline#

50-­100 mg once or twice daily

Hyperpigmentation of
teeth, oral mucosa, and
skin; lupus-­like reactions
with long-­term treatment,
intracranial hypertension, drug
hypersensitivity

Sarecycline

Daily for 12 wk based on weight;
60-­mg, 100-­mg, 150-­mg tablets

Intracranial hypertension,
lightheadedness, candidiasis,
nausea

Newest antimicrobial agent

Trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole

One dose (160 mg trimethoprim,
800 mg sulfamethoxazole) twice
daily

Toxic epidermal necrolysis and
allergic eruptions

Trimethoprim may be used alone
in a 300-­mg dose twice daily;
limited data available; not
generally recommended.

Erythromycin‡

250-­500 mg twice daily

Gastrointestinal upset

Resistance problematic; efficacy
is limited.

TOPICAL AGENTS
Retinoids
Tretinoin

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 710 u Acne

4183

Table 710.4  Medications for the Treatment of Acne—cont’d
DRUG

DOSE

SIDE EFFECTS

OTHER CONSIDERATIONS

HORMONAL AGENTS¶
Spironolactone#

50-­200 mg in 1-­2 divided doses

Temporary menstrual irregularities
and breast tenderness; possible
potassium elevations in those
with renal or cardiac disease

Higher doses more effective but
cause more side effects; best
given in combination with oral
contraceptives.

Daily

Potential side effects include
thromboembolism

Several approved specifically for
acne, but all COCs have efficacy
in acne treatment

0.5-­1.0 mg/kg/day in 2 divided
doses

Birth defects; adherence to
pregnancy prevention program
outlined by drug manufacturer,
including two initial negative
pregnancy tests, is essential;
hypertriglyceridemia, elevated
results on liver function tests,
abnormal night vision, benign
intracranial hypertension,
dryness of the lips, ocular,
nasal, and oral mucosa and
skin, secondary staphylococcal
infections, arthralgias, and
mood disturbances are possible
common or important side
effects; laboratory testing of
lipid profiles and liver function
tests when dosage established

Relapse rate higher if patient is
younger than age 16 yr at initial
treatment, if acne is of high
severity and involves the trunk,
or if drug is used in adult women

Estrogen-­containing oral
contraceptives
ORAL RETINOID
Isotretinoin**

*As cream or gel.
†Tazarotene is in pregnancy category X: contraindicated in pregnancy.
‡Clindamycin, erythromycin, and azelaic acid are in pregnancy category B: no evidence of risk in humans.
§Oral antibiotics are indicated for moderate to severe disease; for the treatment of acne on the chest, back, or shoulders; and in patients with inflammatory disease in whom topical

combinations have failed or are not tolerated.
#This drug is in pregnancy category D: positive evidence of risk in humans.
¶Hormonal agents are for use in women only.

**Isotretinoin is in pregnancy category X: contraindicated in pregnancy. It should be used only in patients with severe acne that does not clear with combined oral and topical
therapy.
Modified from James WD. Clinical practice: Acne. N Engl J Med. 2005;352:1463–1472.

Table 710.5  Recommendations for Systemic Antibiotics
• Systemic antibiotics are recommended in the management of
moderate and severe acne and forms of inflammatory acne that
are resistant to topical treatments.
• Doxycycline and minocycline are more effective than tetracycline.
• Although oral erythromycin or azithromycin can be effective in
treating acne, its use should be limited to those who cannot
use the tetracyclines (i.e., pregnant women or children <8 years
of age). Erythromycin use should be restricted because of its
increased risk of bacterial resistance.
• Use of systemic antibiotics other than the tetracyclines and
macrolides is discouraged because there are limited data for their
use in acne. Trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim
use should be restricted to patients who are unable to tolerate
tetracyclines or to treatment-­resistant patients.
• The use of systemic antibiotics should be limited to the shortest
possible duration. Reevaluate at 3-­4 mo to minimize the
development of bacterial resistance. Monotherapy with systemic
antibiotics is not recommended.
• Concomitant topical therapy with benzoyl peroxide or a retinoid
should be used with systemic antibiotics and for maintenance
after completion of systemic antibiotic therapy.
From Zaenglein AL, Pathy AL, Scholsser BJ, et al. Guidelines of care for the
management of acne vulgaris. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2016;74(5):945–973, Table VI, p.
952.

DRUG-­INDUCED ACNE

Pubertal and postpubertal patients who are receiving systemic corticosteroid therapy are predisposed to steroid-­induced acne. This
monomorphous folliculitis occurs primarily on the face, neck, chest

(Fig. 710.8), shoulders, upper back, arms, and, rarely, on the scalp.
Onset follows the initiation of steroid therapy by approximately 2
weeks. The lesions are small, erythematous papules or pustules that
may erupt in profusion and are all in the same stage of development.
Comedones may occur subsequently, but nodulocystic lesions and
scarring are rare. Pruritus is occasional. Although steroid acne is
relatively refractory if the medication is continued, the eruption may
respond to the use of tretinoin and a benzoyl peroxide gel.
Other drugs that can induce acneiform lesions in susceptible individuals include isoniazid, phenytoin, phenobarbital, trimethadione,
lithium carbonate, androgens (anabolic steroids), and vitamin B12.
Other causes of acne, including halogens and chloracne, are rare and
typically obvious with judicious history-­taking.

NEONATAL CEPHALIC PUSTULOSIS (FORMERLY
NEONATAL ACNE)

Approximately 20% of normal neonates demonstrate pustules and
red papules on the face in the first 6 weeks of life. Small inflammatory papules and pustules predominate on the cheeks and forehead
(Fig. 710.9); comedones are absent. The cause of neonatal acne is
unknown, but it has been theorized that it may be an inflammatory
reaction to Pityrosporum species rather than true acne. Other theories include placental transfer of maternal androgens, hyperactive
neonatal adrenal glands, and a hypersensitive neonatal end-­organ
response to androgenic hormones. The eruption involutes spontaneously over a few months. Treatment is usually unnecessary. If
desired, the lesions can be treated effectively with topical antifungals and/or benzoyl peroxide.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4184 Part XXIX u The Skin
Icepick (V)

Rolling (U)

Punch excision
(deep bases)

Combined
therapy

Elevation and
grafting

Micrograft and
subcision


Laser resurfacing/
dermabrasion
(many scars close
together)

Boxcar (M)

Keloids

Shallow
3 mm diameter-laser
skin resurfacing

Intralesional
corticosteroids

Hypertrophic

Intralesional steroids
Intralesional 5-FU

Intralesional 5-FU
3 mm diameter-laser
skin resurfacing  punch
elevation

Vascular laser
Intralesional bleomycin
Intralesional bleomycin
Compression

 Filler
Resurfacing
microdermabrasion

Spot TCA peel

Deep-spot TCA
peel

Deep
3 mm diameter-punch
excision

Compression
Imiquimod after
intralesional excision

3 mm diameter-punch
excision or punch
elevation

Cryotherapy

Fractional thermolysis
(deep or shallow)

Excision 
electrotherapy

Imiquimod after
intralesional excision

Pulsed-dye laser

Dermabrasion
CO2 laser resurfacing
Adjunctive treatment: Topical retinoids 2 wk before and after treatment, sunscreens, moisturizers
Nonablative lasers for mild disease; ablative and fractional lasers for moderate scarring

Fig. 710.7 Treatment options for acne scars. CO2, Carbon dioxide; FU, fluorouracil; TCA, trichloroacetic acid. (From Thiboutot D, Gollnick H;
Global Alliance to Improve Acne, et al. New insights into the management of acne: an update from the Global Allegiance to Improve Outcomes in
Acne. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2009;60:S1–S50.)

INFANTILE ACNE

Infantile acne usually manifests between 6 weeks and 2 years of age,
more commonly in males than in females (Fig. 710.10). Open and
closed comedones predominate on the face. Papules and pustules occur
frequently, but only occasionally do nodulocystic lesions develop. Pitted scarring is seen in 10–15%. The course may be relatively brief, or
the lesions may persist for many months or years, although the eruption generally resolves by 4 years of age. Use of topical benzoyl peroxide
gel and topical retinoid, as would be recommended for typical acne,
is effective but off-­label. Some acne medications are approved down
to age 9 years but none for infants. Oral erythromycin is occasionally
necessary, and isotretinoin can be used in severe cases. A child with
refractory acne or other signs of pubertal development warrants a
search for an abnormal source of androgens, such as a virilizing tumor
or congenital adrenal hyperplasia.

Fig. 710.8 Monomorphous papular eruption of steroid acne.

MID-­CHILDHOOD ACNE

Acne that begins between 1 and 7 years of age is not considered
normal. Although the neonatal adrenal gland secretes high levels of
androgens through the first year of life, it becomes quiescent until adrenarche, which occurs around age 7. Underlying endocrine abnormality
should be investigated in those presenting with acne in middle childhood. Precocious puberty, late-­onset congenital adrenal hyperplasia,
or an androgen-­secreting tumor may underlie acne in this age-­group.
Workup for androgen excess is indicated.

ACNE FULMINANS (ACUTE FEBRILE ULCERATIVE
ACNE)

Acne fulminans is characterized by abrupt onset of extensive inflammatory, tender, ulcerative acneiform lesions in typically male teenagers
and may be related to recent initiation of isotretinoin. The distinctive

feature is the tendency for large nodules to form exudative, necrotic,
ulcerated, crusted plaques. Lesions heal with extensive scarring.
A preceding history of mild papulopustular or nodular acne is noted
in most patients. Constitutional symptoms and signs are common,
including fever, debilitation, arthralgias, myalgias, weight loss, and
leukocytosis. Blood cultures are sterile. Lesions of erythema nodosum
sometimes develop on the shins. Osteolytic bone lesions may develop
in the clavicle, sternum, and epiphyseal growth plates; affected bones
appear normal or have slight sclerosis or thickening on healing. Salicylates may be helpful for the myalgias, arthralgias, and fever. Treatment
should be directed by a dermatologist and includes systemic corticosteroids and isotretinoin. Antibiotics are not indicated unless there is
evidence of secondary infection.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 711 u Tumors of the Skin

4185

the cyst is derived from the follicular infundibulum. A mass of layered
keratinized material that may have a cheesy consistency fills the cavity.
Cysts may arise from occlusion of pilosebaceous follicles (acneiform
cysts), implantation of epidermal cells into the dermis as a result of
an injury that penetrates the epidermis (epidermal inclusion cysts),
and rests of epidermal cells (epidermoid cysts). Multiple epidermoid
cysts may be present in Gardner syndrome and nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome. Excision of the cyst with removal of the entire sac and
its contents is indicated, particularly if the cyst becomes recurrently
inflamed. A fluctuant cyst should be incised and drained and, if there
is surrounding erythema, treated with antibiotics or intralesional corticosteroids. After the inflammation subsides, the cyst may be removed.

MILIUM
Fig. 710.9 Comedonal acne in a neonate.

A milium is a 1-­to 2-­mm, firm, pearly white or yellowish subepidermal
keratin cyst. Milia in newborns are discussed in Chapter 688. Secondary milia occur in association with subepidermal blistering diseases
and after dermabrasion or other injury to the skin. They are retention cysts caused by hyperproliferation of injured epithelium and are
indistinguishable histopathologically from primary milia. Those that
develop after blistering usually arise from the eccrine sweat duct, but
they may develop from the hair follicle, sebaceous duct, or epidermis.
A milium body differs from an infundibular follicular cyst only in its
small size and superficial location.

FIBROFOLLICULOMAS

Fig. 710.10 Inflammatory infantile acne.

These lesions usually appear in late adolescence or in young adults
and are characterized by multiple dome-­shaped, clear-­white papules
appearing on the nose, cheeks, and neck, and at times the trunk or ears
(Fig. 711.2). They are associated with the familial cancer syndrome of
Birt-­Hogg-­Dubé, an autosomal dominant disorder that results from
a pathogenic variant in the folliculin (FLCN) tumor suppressor gene.
Associated features include pulmonary cysts, pneumothorax, renal cell
carcinoma, and other benign or malignant tumors.

PILAR CYST (TRICHILEMMAL CYST)
Pyogenic Arthritis with Pyoderma Gangrenosum and Acne (PAPA
Syndrome) (see Fig. 710.5, Chapter 204, and Chapter 702).
Chronic Recurrent Multifocal Osteomyelitis/Synovitis Acne Pustulosis Hyperostosis Osteitis (SAPHO) Syndrome (see Chapter 204).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 711

Tumors of the Skin
Kari L. Martin
See also Chapter 636.

INFUNDIBULAR FOLLICULAR CYST

Infundibular follicular cysts (more commonly referred to as epidermoid
cysts or sebaceous cysts) are the nodules most commonly seen in children. Such a cyst is a sharply circumscribed, dome-­shaped, firm, freely
movable, skin-­colored nodule (Fig. 711.1), often with a central dimple
or punctum that is a plugged, dilated pore of a pilosebaceous follicle.
Follicular cysts form most frequently on the face, neck, chest, or upper
back and may periodically become inflamed and infected secondarily,
particularly in association with acne vulgaris. The cyst wall may also
rupture and induce an inflammatory reaction in the dermis. The wall of

A pilar cyst may be clinically indistinguishable from an infundibular
follicular cyst. It manifests as a smooth, firm, mobile nodule, predominantly on the scalp (Fig. 711.3). Pilar cysts occasionally develop on the
face, neck, or trunk. A cyst may become inflamed and may occasionally
suppurate and ulcerate. The cyst wall is composed of stratified squamous epithelium with indistinct intercellular bridges. The peripheral
cell layer of the wall shows a palisade arrangement, which is not seen in
an epidermoid cyst. No granular layer is present. The cyst cavity contains dense homogeneous eosinophilic keratinous material, and foci of
calcification are seen in 25% of cases. The propensity for development
of pilar cysts may be inherited in an autosomal dominant manner.
More than one cyst generally develops in a patient. Numerous pilar
and epidermoid cysts, desmoid tumors, fibromas, lipomas, or osteomas
may be associated with colonic polyposis or adenocarcinoma in Gardner syndrome. Pilar cysts shell out easily from the dermis.

PILOMATRICOMA (PILOMATRIXOMA)

The second most common nodule seen in children, pilomatricoma is
a benign tumor that manifests as a 3-­to 30-­mm, firm, solitary, deep
dermal or subcutaneous tumor on the head, neck, or upper extremities. The overlying epidermis is usually normal. The tumor may occasionally be located more superficially, however, tinting the overlying
skin blue-­red (Fig. 711.4). Multiple pilomatricomas are seen in myotonic dystrophy, Gardner syndrome, Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome, and
Turner syndrome. In general, however, pilomatricomas are not hereditary. Histopathologically, irregularly shaped islands of epithelial cells
with eosinophilic, anucleate “ghost cells” are embedded in a cellular
stroma. Calcium deposits are found in 75% of tumors. Pilomatricomas
are caused by pathogenic variants in β-­catenin.

TRICHOEPITHELIOMA

A 2-­to 8-­
mm, smooth, round, firm, skin-­
colored papule,
trichoepithelioma is derived from an immature hair follicle.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4186 Part XXIX u The Skin

Fig. 711.1 Flesh-­colored cyst on the forehead.

Fig. 711.4 Pilomatricoma. Firm tumor with overlying bluish discoloration of the skin.

ERUPTIVE VELLUS HAIR CYSTS

Eruptive vellus hair cysts are 1-­to 3-­mm, asymptomatic, soft, skin-­
colored follicular papules on the central chest (Fig. 711.5). They may
become crusted or umbilicated. Abnormal vellus hair follicles become
occluded at the level of the infundibulum, resulting in retention of
hairs within an epithelium-­lined cystic dilation of the proximal part
of the follicle. Most cases are chronic, but spontaneous regression has
been reported.

STEATOCYSTOMA MULTIPLEX

Fig. 711.2 Multiple dome-­shaped, whitish papules on the nose and

cheeks in a 31-­yr-­old carrier of an FLCN pathogenic variant. (From Menko FH, van Steensel MAM, Giraud S, et al. Birt-­Hogg-­Dubé syndrome:
diagnosis and management. Lancet. 2009;10:1199–1206, Fig. 1.)

An autosomal dominant (KRT17 gene) condition, steatocystoma multiplex usually manifests in adolescence or early adulthood as numerous
soft to firm cystic nodules that are adherent to the underlying skin and
are 3 mm to 3 cm in diameter. When punctured, the cysts may drain
oily or cheesy material. Sites of predilection include the sternal region,
axillae, arms, and scrotal skin. The multiply folded cyst wall is lined on
the luminal side with a thick, homogeneous, eosinophilic horny layer;
there is no granular layer. Flattened sebaceous gland lobules are often
visible in the cyst wall, and lanugo hairs may be present in a cystic cavity that appears otherwise empty (a processing artifact).

SYRINGOMA

The benign tumors known as syringomas are soft, small, skin-­colored
or yellowish-­brown papules that develop on the face, particularly in
the periorbital regions (Fig. 711.6). Other sites of predilection include
the axillae and umbilical and pubic areas. They often develop during puberty and are more frequent in females. Eruptive syringomas
develop in crops over the anterior trunk during childhood or adolescence. A syringoma is derived from an intraepidermal sweat gland
duct. Syringomas are of cosmetic significance only. Sparse lesions may
be excised, but they are often too numerous to remove.

INFANTILE DIGITAL FIBROMA
Fig. 711.3 Pilar cyst of the anterior scalp.

Trichoepitheliomas generally occur singly on the face in childhood or early adulthood. Multiple trichoepitheliomas are inherited
autosomal dominantly (type 1: CYLD gene; type 2: 9p21 gene currently unidentified), appear in childhood or at puberty, and gradually increase in number on the nasofacial folds, nose, forehead, and
upper lip; occasionally they occur on the scalp, neck, and upper
trunk. Microscopically, these benign tumors are characterized by
horn cysts composed of a fully keratinized center surrounded by
basophilic cells in an adenoid network. Topical imiquimod therapy
may be beneficial. Surgical excision has been used for therapy, as
have cryotherapy, electrosurgery, and laser vaporization.

Infantile digital fibroma is a smooth, firm, erythematous or skin-­
colored nodule on the dorsal or lateral surface of a distal phalanx of
a finger or toe. More than 80% of tumors occur in infancy or may be
present at birth. Lesions may be solitary or multiple and may manifest as “kissing” tumors on opposing digits. They are usually asymptomatic, but flexion deformity of the digits may occur. Clinically the
lesion resembles a fibroma, leiomyoma, angiofibroma, acquired digital
fibrokeratoma, accessory digit, or mucous cyst. The diagnosis is confirmed by the finding of numerous spindle-­shaped fibroblasts that
contain small, round, dense eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclusion bodies
composed of collections of actin microfilaments. Local recurrence after
simple excision of this tumor has been reported in 75% of patients.
Because the tumor does not metastasize and may regress spontaneously in 2-­3 years, a course of expectant observation is advised. If functional impairment or flexion deformity of the digit becomes apparent,
prompt full excision of the tumor is indicated.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 711 u Tumors of the Skin

Fig. 711.5 Eruptive vellus hair cysts. Multiple papules on the chest.

4187

Fig. 711.7 Dermatofibroma. Red-­brown nodular variant.

A

Fig. 711.6 Syringomas. Multiple yellow papules near the eye.

DERMATOFIBROMA

A benign dermal tumor, dermatofibroma may be pedunculated, nodular (Fig. 711.7), or flat and is usually well circumscribed and firm
but occasionally feels soft on palpation. The overlying skin is usually
hyperpigmented; it may be shiny or keratotic and dimples when the
tumor is pinched. Dermatofibromas range in size from 0.5 to 10.0 mm,
arise most frequently on the limbs, and are usually asymptomatic but
may occasionally be pruritic. They are composed of fibroblasts, young
and mature collagen, capillaries, and histiocytes in varying proportions, forming a nodule in the dermis that has poorly defined edges.
The cause of these tumors is unknown, but trauma such as an insect
bite or folliculitis appears to induce reactive fibroplasia. The differential diagnosis includes epidermal inclusion cyst, juvenile xanthogranuloma, hypertrophic scar, and neurofibroma. Dermatofibromas may be
excised or left intact, according to the patient’s preference. They usually
persist indefinitely.

JUVENILE XANTHOGRANULOMA

A firm, dome-­shaped, yellow, pink, or orange papule or nodule (Fig.
711.8), juvenile xanthogranuloma varies from 5 mm to approximately
4 cm in diameter. The average age at onset is 2 years. These nodules are
10 times more common in White than in Black individuals. Sites of

B
Fig. 711.8 A, Juvenile xanthogranuloma. A 4-­mm, apricot-­colored,

dome-­
shaped, firm papule with overlying telangiectasias below the
nasal columella. B, Pink-­red rim in a “setting-­sun” pattern seen by dermoscopy. (From Bell KA, Marathe K, Burke KT, Cardis MA. A persistent
pimple in a 5-­year-­old girl. J Pediatr. 2020;224:172–173, Figs. 1 and 2,
p. 172).

predilection are the scalp, face, and upper trunk, where they may erupt
in profusion or remain as solitary lesions. Nodular lesions may appear
on the oral mucosa. The diagnosis is usually made clinically. Mature
lesions are characterized histopathologically by a dermal infiltrate of
lipid-­laden histiocytes, admixed inflammatory cells, and Touton giant
cells. Clinically the lesions may resemble papulonodular urticaria pigmentosa, dermatofibromas, or xanthomas of hyperlipoproteinemia,
but they can be distinguished from these entities histopathologically.
Affected infants are nearly always otherwise normal, and blood
lipid values are not elevated. Café-­au-­lait macules are found on 20% of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4188 Part XXIX u The Skin
patients with juvenile xanthogranuloma. Xanthogranulomatous infiltrates occur occasionally in the iris or other ocular tissues. This process
may result in glaucoma, hyphema, uveitis, heterochromia iridis, iritis,
or sudden proptosis. When seen in patients <2 years of age, multiple
lesions and periocular location may heighten concerns for intraocular involvement. There appears to be an association among juvenile
xanthogranuloma, neurofibromatosis, and childhood leukemia, most
frequently juvenile chronic myelogenous leukemia. There is no need to
remove the benign lesions of juvenile xanthogranuloma because most
of them regress spontaneously in the first few years. Residual dyspigmentation and atrophy may result.

LIPOMA

A benign collection of fatty tissue, lipoma appears on the trunk, neck,
or proximal portions of the limbs. Lipomas are soft, compressible, lobulated subcutaneous masses. Multiple lesions may occur occasionally,
as in Gardner syndrome. Atrophy, calcification, liquefaction, or xanthomatous change may sometimes complicate their course. A lipoma
is composed of normal fat cells surrounded by a thin connective tissue capsule. Lipomas represent a cosmetic defect and may be surgically excised. Multiple lipomas, identical to those that occur singly, are
inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion and often appear by the
third decade in patients with familial multiple lipomatosis. Lipomas
may appear intraabdominally, intramuscularly, and subcutaneously.
Congenital lipomatosis manifests in the first few months of life as large
subcutaneous fatty masses on the chest with extension into skeletal
muscle. Congenital lipomatosis can also be a manifestation of Proteus
syndrome (overgrowth/hyperplasia skin, connective tissue, pathogenic variant in AKT1). Angiolipomas usually manifest as numerous
painful subcutaneous nodules on the arms and trunk.
CLOVES syndrome (congenital lipomatous overgrowth, vascular
malformations, epidermal nevi, and scoliosis/skeletal and spinal anomalies) is usually a sporadic disorder caused by a pathogenic variant in
the PIK3CA gene with an asymmetric truncal lipomatous mass present at birth. Additional features include macrodactyly, vascular malformations (low flow), linear epidermal nevus, and renal anomalies.

A

B

The differential diagnosis includes Proteus, Klippel-­Trenaunay, and
Bannayan-­Riley-­Ruvalcaba syndromes.
PIK3CA somatic pathogenic variants and those in the related AKT-­
mTOR pathway (PIK3CA-­related overgrowth spectrum [PROS]) are
associated with segmental overgrowth syndromes (Fig. 711.9; see also
Fig. 691.6). In addition to regional/localized tissue overgrowth, there
is a spectrum of malformations (hemimegaloencephaly, macrodactyly,
lymphatic, muscle hemihypertrophy, epidermal nevi, capillary, polydactyly, syndactyly).

BASAL CELL CARCINOMA

Basal cell carcinoma is very rare in children in the absence of a predisposing condition, such as nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome, xeroderma pigmentosum, nevus sebaceus of Jadassohn, arsenic intake, or
exposure to irradiation. The lesions are smooth, pearly, pink telangiectatic papules that enlarge slowly and may bleed or ulcerate. Sites of predilection are the face, scalp, and upper back. The differential diagnosis
includes pyogenic granuloma, nevocellular nevus, epidermal inclusion
cyst, closed comedo, dermatofibroma, and adnexal tumor. Depending
on the site of occurrence and associated disease of the host, electrodesiccation and curettage or simple excision of basal cell carcinoma
is usually curative. When the tumor is recurrent, >2 cm in diameter,
located on problematic anatomic areas such as the midface or ears, or
is an aggressive histopathologic type, Mohs microscopically controlled
surgery may be the most appropriate treatment.

NEVOID BASAL CELL CARCINOMA SYNDROME
(BASAL CELL NEVUS SYNDROME, GORLIN
SYNDROME)

The autosomal dominant entity known as nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome is caused by pathogenic variants in the PTCH1,
PTCH2 (“patched”), and SUFU genes. These tumor-­suppressor genes,
part of the hedgehog signaling pathway, are important in determining embryonic patterning and cell fate in a number of structures in
the developing embryo. Pathogenic variants in these genes produce dysregulation of several genes involved in organogenesis and

C

D

Fig. 711.9 Photographs and MRIs of participants with isolated LM, CLOVES, KTS, and FAVA. A, An 8-­mo-­old boy (LM1) with isolated LM. Note

swelling in deltoid region without cutaneous vascular signs. Coronal and sagittal fat-­saturated T2-­weighted MRI demonstrates macrocystic LM (a
multilocular cystic mass) involving the anterolateral aspects of the right shoulder without muscular infiltration (arrows); humeral head (asterisk). B, A
19-­mo-­old female (CL12) with CLOVES syndrome. Note asymmetric distribution of truncal lipomatous masses and bilateral lower extremity involvement. Coronal fat-­saturated T1-­weighted MRI after contrast administration demonstrates moderate heterogeneous enhancement of the bilateral
truncal masses (arrows). Axial T1-­weighted MRI without contrast depicts truncal lipomatous overgrowth (arrows); segment VI of the liver (asterisk).
C, A 3-­yr-­old boy (KT4) with KTS. Note capillary LM and overgrowth involving the right lower extremity. Coronal and axial fat-­saturated T2-­weighted
MRI shows the persistent marginal vein system (bent arrows) and marked enlargement of the subcutaneous tissues due to a combination of lymphatic fluid and fat (straight arrow). There are also intramuscular venous malformations. D, A 9-­yr-­old boy (F8) with FAVA of the left gastrocnemius
muscle; note absence of overgrowth and cutaneous vascular anomalies. Sagittal fat-­saturated T1-­weighted MRI after contrast administration demonstrates the longitudinal distribution of the diffuse FAVA (arrows). Axial fat-­saturated T2-­weighted MRI with (upper) and without (lower) contrast. Note
that the right head of the gastrocnemius muscle is diffusely replaced by a contrast-­enhancing heterogeneous soft tissue lesion (arrows). CLOVES,
Congenital lipomatous overgrowth with vascular, epidermal, and skeletal anomalies; FAVA, fibroadipose vascular anomaly; KTS, Klippel-­Trenaunay
syndrome; LM, lymphatic malformation. (From Luks VL, Kamitaki N, Vivero MP, et al. Lymphatic and other vascular malformative/overgrowth disorders are caused by somatic pathogenic variants in PIK3CA. J Pediatr. 2015;166:1048–1054, Fig. 1, p. 1051.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 712 u Nutritional Dermatoses 4189
carcinogenesis. Consequently, the syndrome includes a wide spectrum
of defects involving the skin, eyes, central nervous and endocrine systems, and bones. The predominant features are early-­onset basal cell
carcinomas and mandibular cysts. Approximately 20% of those in
whom a basal cell carcinoma develops before age 19 years have this
syndrome. Basal cell carcinomas appear between puberty and age 35
years, erupting in crops of tumors that vary in size, color, and number;
they may be difficult to distinguish from other types of skin lesions.
Sites of predilection are the periorbital skin, nose, malar areas, and
upper lip, but the lesions can also develop on the trunk and limbs and
are not restricted to sun-­exposed areas. Ulceration, bleeding, crusting,
and local invasion can occur. Small milia, epidermal cysts, pigmented
lesions, hirsutism, and palmar and plantar pits are additional cutaneous findings.
The facies of patients with this syndrome are characterized by temporoparietal bossing, prominent supraorbital ridges, a broad nasal
root, ocular hypertelorism or dystopia canthorum, and prognathism.
Keratinized cysts (odontogenic keratocysts) in the maxilla and mandible occur in most patients. These cysts range in size from a few
millimeters to several centimeters; may result in maldevelopment of
the teeth; and cause pain, swelling of the jaw, facial deformity, bone
erosion, pathologic fractures, and suppurating sinus tracts. Osseous
defects such as anomalous rib development, spina bifida, kyphoscoliosis, and brachymetacarpalism occur in 60% of patients, and ocular
abnormalities—including cataracts, glaucoma, coloboma, strabismus,
and blindness—occur in approximately 25%. Some males have hypogonadism, and the testes are absent or undescended. Kidney malformations have also been reported. Neurologic manifestations include
calcification of the falx, seizures, mental retardation, partial agenesis of
the corpus callosum, hydrocephalus, and nerve deafness. The incidence
of medulloblastoma, ameloblastoma of the oral cavity, fibrosarcoma of
the jaw, teratoma, cystadenoma, cardiac fibroma, ovarian fibroma, and
fetal-­onset rhabdomyoma is higher in patients with nevoid basal cell
carcinoma syndrome.
Treatment of these patients requires the participation of various
specialists according to individual clinical problems. Basal cell carcinomas should not be treated with irradiation. Most of the basal cell
carcinomas have a clinically benign course, and it is often impossible
to remove them all. Those with an aggressive growth pattern and those
on the central areas of the face, however, should be removed promptly.
Treatment options include surgery, Mohs micrographic surgery, laser
ablation, cryotherapy, photodynamic therapy, topical 5% imiquimod
and oral retinoids (0.5-­1.0 mg/kg/day). Vismodegib, which inhibits
smoothened protein in the hedgehog pathway, is a targeted therapy
available for unresectable basal cell carcinomas. Genetic counseling is
also indicated.

MELANOMA
See Chapter 692.

MUCOSAL NEUROMA SYNDROME (MULTIPLE
ENDOCRINE NEOPLASIA TYPE IIB)

Mucosal neuroma syndrome, an autosomal dominant trait, is characterized by an asthenic or marfanoid habitus with scoliosis, pectus excavatum, pes cavus, and muscular hypotonia. The syndrome is caused
by pathogenic variants in the tyrosine kinase domain of the RET gene.
Patients have thick, patulous lips and soft tissue prognathism simulating acromegaly. Multiple mucosal neuromas or neurofibromas appear
as pink, pedunculated, or sessile nodules on the anterior third of the
tongue, at the commissures of the lips, and on the buccal mucosa and
palpebral conjunctiva. Various ophthalmologic defects and intestinal
ganglioneuromatosis with recurrent diarrhea are additional common
findings. There is a high incidence of medullary thyroid carcinoma
in association with high calcitonin levels, pheochromocytoma, and
hyperparathyroidism in patients with this syndrome. Periodic screening tests for the associated malignant tumors are mandatory.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 712

Nutritional Dermatoses
Joel C. Joyce
OVERVIEW

There are many cutaneous manifestations of nutritional deficiencies
(Table 712.1). For more details see Chapters 64-­72.

ACRODERMATITIS ENTEROPATHICA

Acrodermatitis enteropathica is a rare autosomal recessive disorder
caused by an inability to absorb sufficient zinc from the diet. The genetic
variant is in the intestinal zinc-­specific transporter gene SLC39A4.
Initial signs and symptoms usually occur in the first few months of
life, often after weaning from breast milk to cow’s milk. The cutaneous
eruption consists of vesiculobullous, eczematous, dry, scaly, or psoriasiform skin lesions symmetrically distributed in the perioral, acral,
and perineal areas (Fig. 712.1) and on the cheeks, knees, and elbows
(Fig. 712.2). The hair often has a peculiar, reddish tint, and alopecia
of some degree is characteristic. Ocular manifestations include photophobia, conjunctivitis, blepharitis, and corneal dystrophy detectable
by slit-­lamp examination. Associated manifestations include chronic
diarrhea, stomatitis, glossitis, paronychia, nail dystrophy, growth retardation, irritability, delayed wound healing, intercurrent bacterial infections, and superinfection with Candida albicans. Lymphocyte function
and free radical scavenging are impaired. Without treatment the course
is chronic and intermittent but often relentlessly progressive. When the
disease is less severe, only growth retardation and delayed development
may be apparent.
The diagnosis is established by the constellation of clinical findings
and detection of a low plasma zinc concentration. A serum zinc level
less than 50 μg/dL is suggestive, but not diagnostic, of acrodermatitis enteropathica. Levels of alkaline phosphatase, a zinc-­dependent
enzyme, may also be decreased. Histopathologic changes in the skin
are nonspecific and include parakeratosis and pallor of the upper epidermis. The variety of manifestations of the syndrome may stem from
the fact that zinc has a role in numerous metabolic pathways—including those of copper, protein, essential fatty acids, and prostaglandins—
and that zinc is incorporated into many zinc metalloenzymes. Other
nutritional deficiencies may produce similar findings (see Table 712.1),
although the classic findings are highly suggestive of acrodermatitis
enteropathica.
Oral therapy with zinc compounds is the treatment of choice.
Replacement for individuals with inherited acrodermatitis enteropathica is with elemental zinc 3 mg/kg/24 hr in the form of zinc sulfate, gluconate, or acetate (i.e., 220 mg of zinc sulfate contains 50 mg
of elemental zinc). Zinc gluconate carries less risk of gastrointestinal
distress. However, plasma zinc levels should be monitored every 3-­6
months so as to individualize the dosage. Zinc therapy rapidly abolishes the manifestations of the disease. Supplementation is for life. A
syndrome resembling acrodermatitis enteropathica has been observed
in patients with secondary zinc deficiency resulting from long-­term
total parenteral nutrition without supplemental zinc or to chronic malabsorption syndromes. A rash similar to acrodermatitis enteropathica
has also been reported in infants fed breast milk that is low in zinc and
in those with maple syrup urine disease, organic aciduria, methylmalonic acidemia, biotinidase deficiency, essential fatty acid deficiency,
severe protein malnutrition (kwashiorkor), and cystic fibrosis. Cutaneous manifestations tend to appear in more severe forms. For those
individuals with acquired zinc deficiency, oral replacement with elemental zinc, 0.5-­1.0 mg/kg/24 hr, should be undertaken and the cause
of underlying malnutrition should be addressed.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4190 Part XXIX u The Skin
Table 712.1  Distinctive Skin Changes of Nutritional Disorders and Selected Differential Diagnosis
SKIN CHANGE

NUTRITIONAL DISORDER

SELECTED DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Exfoliative erythroderma

Kwashiorkor

Atopic dermatitis, psoriasis, staphylococcal
scalded skin syndrome

Phrynoderma

Vitamin A deficiency, vitamin B–complex
deficiencies, vitamin C deficiency, essential
fatty acid deficiency

Keratosis pilaris, pityriasis rubra pilaris

Petechiae, purpura

Vitamin K deficiency, vitamin C deficiency
(perifollicular petechiae)

Consumptive coagulopathy, coagulation
disorder, thrombocytopenia, vascular
fragility syndrome (Ehlers-­Danlos), cutaneous
vasculitis (e.g., Henoch-­Schoenlein purpura)

Yellow-­orange discoloration

Carotenemia

Jaundice, quinacrine-­induced

Hyperpigmentation

Vitamin B12 deficiency, folate deficiency

Addison disease

Photodistributed dermatitis

Vitamin B3 deficiency (pellagra), vitamin B6
deficiency

Connective tissue disease (systemic
lupus erythematosus, dermatomyositis),
polymorphous light eruption

Seborrheic dermatitis–like changes

Vitamin B–complex deficiencies

Seborrheic dermatitis, psoriasis

Angular stomatitis

Vitamin B–complex deficiencies, iron
deficiency

Angular cheilitis with candidal overgrowth

Glossitis

Vitamin B–complex deficiencies, zinc
deficiency, iron deficiency

Sjogren syndrome, oral lichen planus, syphilis

Diaper dermatitis

Zinc deficiency, vitamin B–complex
deficiencies

Irritant or allergic contact dermatitis,
seborrheic dermatitis, inverse psoriasis,
Langerhans cell histiocytosis

Lightening of hair

Kwashiorkor, marasmus, vitamin B–complex
deficiencies, copper deficiency

Poliosis, vitiligo

Corkscrew hairs

Vitamin C deficiency

Nail changes

Koilonychia: iron deficiency
Longitudinal hyperpigmented streaks: vitamin
B3 deficiency (pellagra)

Koilonychia: chronic irritant, lichen planus,
psoriasis, Plummer–Vinson syndrome,
transient in young children
Longitudinal hyperpigmented streaks:
physiologic, drug-­induced, trauma

From Wong CY, Chu DH. Cutaneous signs of nutritional disorders. Inter J Women Dermatol. 2021;7:647–652: Table 1, p. 649.

ESSENTIAL FATTY ACID DEFICIENCY

Essential fatty acid deficiency causes a generalized scaly dermatitis
composed of thickened, erythematous, desquamating plaques. Individuals may also show failure to thrive, growth retardation, alopecia,
thrombocytopenia, and poor wound healing. The eruption has been
induced experimentally in animals fed a fat-­free diet and has been
observed in patients with chronic severe malabsorption, as in short-­gut
syndrome, and in those sustained on a fat-­free diet or fat-­free parenteral alimentation. Linoleic acid (18:2 n-­6) and arachidonic acid (20:4
n-­6) are deficient, and an abnormal metabolite, 5,8,11-­eicosatrienoic
acid (20:3 n-­9), is present in the plasma. Alterations in the triene/tetraene ratio are diagnostic (arachidonic acid/eicosatrienoic acid ratio
>0.4 or linoleic acid/arachidonic acid ratio >2.3). The horny layer of
the skin contains microscopic cracks, the barrier function of the skin is
disturbed, and transepidermal water loss is increased. Topical application of linoleic acid, which is present in sunflower seed and safflower
oils, may ameliorate the clinical and biochemical skin manifestations,
although absorption can be inconsistent. Oral and/or parenteral therapy can also be considered. Appropriate nutrition should be provided,
with the recommendation that 1–4% of total calories should be from
linoleic acid.

KWASHIORKOR

Severe protein and essential amino acid deprivation in association with
adequate caloric intake can lead to kwashiorkor, particularly at the
time of weaning to a diet that consists primarily of corn, rice (or rice

milk), or beans (see Chapter 64). Children can be fed such a restricted
diet for cultural reasons or because of misdiagnosis on the part of the
child’s parents or healthcare providers of perceived food allergies.
Diffuse, fine, reddish-­brown scaling (enamel/flaky paint sign) is the
classic cutaneous finding. In severe cases, erosions and linear fissures
develop (Fig. 712.3). Nails are thin and soft, and hair is sparse, thin, and
depigmented, sometimes displaying a “flag sign” consisting of alternating light and dark bands that reflect alternating periods of adequate
and inadequate nutrition. The cutaneous manifestations may closely
resemble those of acrodermatitis enteropathica; however, edema of the
extremities and face (“moon facies”) and a protuberant abdomen (“pot
belly”) are key features uniformly observed in kwashiorkor. The serum
zinc level is often deficient; in some cases, skin lesions of kwashiorkor
heal more rapidly when zinc is applied topically. See Chapter 64 for
treatment recommendations.

CYSTIC FIBROSIS

See Chapter 454.
Protein-­calorie malnutrition develops in 5–10% of patients with
cystic fibrosis. Rash in infants with cystic fibrosis and malnutrition
is rare but may appear by age 6 months. The initial eruption consists of scaling, erythematous papules and progresses in 1-­3 months
to extensive desquamating plaques. The rash is accentuated around
the mouth and perineum and on the extremities (lower greater than
upper). Alopecia may be present, but mucous membranes and nails
are uninvolved.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 712 u Nutritional Dermatoses 4191
PELLAGRA

See Chapter 67.3.
Pellagra manifests as edema, erythema, and burning of sun-­exposed
skin on the face, neck, and dorsal aspects of the hands, forearms, and
feet. Lesions of pellagra may also be provoked by burns, pressure, friction, and inflammation. The eruption on the face frequently follows a
butterfly distribution, and the dermatitis encircling the neck has been
termed “Casal’s necklace.” Blisters and scales develop, and the skin
increasingly becomes dry, rough, thickened, cracked, and hyperpigmented. Skin infections may be unusually severe. Pellagra develops
in patients with insufficient dietary intake or malabsorption of niacin
and/or tryptophan. Administration of isoniazid, 6-­mercaptopurine,
or 5-­fluorouracil may also produce pellagra. Hartnup disease (see
Chapter 105), caused by a pathogenic gene variant in SLC6A19, which
encodes a neutral amino acid transporter, is a rare autosomal recessive
disorder that presents in infancy with a “pellagra-­like syndrome” as a
result of decreased absorption of tryptophan. Nicotinamide supplementation and sun avoidance are the mainstays of therapy in pellagra.
See Chapter 67.3 for treatment recommendations.

A

B
Fig. 712.1 A, Periorificial eruption. B, Diaper rash. The skin findings

are typical of zinc deficiency, in this case caused by low levels of zinc
in breast milk. (From Eichenfield LF, Frieden IJ, Esterly NB. Textbook of
Neonatal Dermatology. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2001: Fig. 14.14.)

Fig. 712.3 Erosions and scaling in kwashiorkor.

Fig. 712.2 A, Psoriasiform le-

A

B

sion of zinc deficiency dermatitis
on the ankles. B, Similar lesions on
the elbows.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4192 Part XXIX u The Skin
SCURVY (VITAMIN C OR ASCORBIC ACID
DEFICIENCY)

See Chapter 68.
Scurvy manifests initially as follicular hyperkeratosis, or coiling
of the hair on the upper arms, back, buttocks, and lower extremities
(Fig. 712.4). Other features are perifollicular erythema and hemorrhage, particularly on the legs and advancing to involve large areas of
hemorrhage; swollen, erythematous gums (Fig. 712.5); stomatitis; and
subperiosteal hematomas. In children, the most common risk factors
are behavioral or psychiatric disease resulting in poor nutrition. The
best method of confirmation of a clinical diagnosis of scurvy is a trial
of vitamin C supplementation. Treatment is with 100-­200 mg/day of
vitamin C supplementation orally or parenterally for up to 3 months.

VITAMIN A DEFICIENCY
See Chapter 66.

Fig. 712.5 Clinical photograph showing inflamed marginal gingiva

in scurvy. (From Agarwal A, Shaharyar A, Kumar A, et al. Scurvy in
pediatric age group – a disease often forgotten? J Clin Ortho Trauma.
2015;6:101–107, Fig. 1, p. 103.)

Vitamin A deficiency manifests initially as impairment of visual
adaptation to the dark. Cutaneous changes include xerosis and hyperkeratosis and hyperplasia of the epidermis, particularly the lining of
hair follicles and sebaceous glands. In severe cases, desquamation may
be prominent. See Chapter 66 for treatment recommendations.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.
Fig. 712.4 Scurvy. (Photo courtesy Albert Yan, MD.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Bone and Joint Disorders
Section 1

PART

XXX

IN UTERO POSITIONING

Orthopedic Problems
Chapter 713

Orthopedic Growth and
Development
Brendan A. Williams and Lawrence Wells
There is a wide spectrum of normal orthopedic growth and development in children. Normal values are often defined as those that
fall within 2 standard deviations of the mean value for the population, a range that accounts for approximately 95% of values. Statistically normal should not be confused with ideal in any given person’s
or parent’s mind. Table 713.1 lists terms used to describe some
common deviations from normal. Congenital anomalies can be categorized into production problems and packaging problems. Production problems include abnormalities caused by malformation,
dysplasia, or disruption that will not spontaneously resolve (see
Chapter 100). Packaging problems include deformations caused by
mechanical causes, including in utero positioning and molding, and
they usually resolve with time.

Table 713.1  Terminologies for Deviations
TERMINOLOGY

DESCRIPTION

Congenital

Anomaly that is apparent at birth

Deformation

A normally formed structure
that is pushed out of shape by
mechanical forces

Deformity

A body part altered in shape
from normal, outside the
normal range

Developmental

A deviation that occurs over
time; one that might not be
present or apparent at birth

Disruption

A structure undergoing normal
development that stops
developing or is destroyed or
removed

Dysplasia

A tissue that is abnormal or
wrongly constructed

Malformation

A structure that is wrongly
built; failure of embryologic
development or differentiation
resulting in abnormal or
missing structures

In utero positioning produces temporary joint and muscle contractures
and affects the torsional alignment of the long bones, particularly those of
the lower extremities. Normal full-­term newborns can have up to 20-­to
30-­degree hip and knee flexion contractures. These contractures tend to
resolve by 4-6 months of age. The newborn hip externally rotates in extension up to 80-90 degrees and has limited internal rotation to approximately
0-10 degrees. The lower leg often has inward rotation (internal tibial torsion). The face may also be distorted; the spine and upper extremities are
less affected by the in utero position. The effects of in utero positioning,
therefore, are physiologic in origin and resolve by 3-4 months of age.

GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT

Consideration of growth and development helps formulate treatment
strategies designed to preserve or restore normal growth potential.
Growth is subject to many variables, including genetics, nutrition, general health, endocrine status, mechanical forces, and physiologic age.
Growth also varies between two anatomic regions and even between
two bones of the same region.
Bone formation or ossification occurs in two different ways. In endochondral ossification, mesenchymal cells undergo chondrogenesis to
form cartilage that matures to become bone. Most bones in the axial
and appendicular skeleton are formed in this manner. In intramembranous ossification, osteoblasts are formed by direct differentiation
of mesenchymal cells into bone. Flat bones of the skull and clavicle are
examples of this pattern of bone formation.

CENTERS OF OSSIFICATION

At the beginning of the fetal period, the chondrocytes in the midshaft of the long bones form the primary centers of growth from
which the bone eventually lengthens. Secondary centers of ossification appear in the chondroepiphysis and mostly appear postnatally.
They direct the formation of bone throughout growth, particularly
joint development. The ossification centers that are typically present at birth are the distal femur, proximal tibia, calcaneus, and talus
(Fig. 713.1).

Anatomic Locations: Descriptive Terms

Typical long bones are divided into the physis, epiphysis, metaphysis, diaphysis, and perichondrial ring (Figs. 713.2 and 713.3). The
physis is the growth plate located at the end of bone. The epiphysis
is typically a secondary ossification center that contributes to joint
development. The metaphysis is the bone adjacent to the physis on
the side away from the joint. The diaphysis is the central part or
shaft of long bones. The perichondrial ring contributes to appositional growth.
The articular cartilage also contributes to the growth of the epiphysis. The perichondrial ring, which surrounds the physes, and the perichondrium around the epiphyses and periosteum, which surrounds
the metaphysis and diaphyseal regions of the bone, contribute to
appositional or circumferential growth. Bones without physes (pelvis,
scapulae, carpals, tarsals) grow by appositional bone growth from their
surrounding perichondrium and periosteum. Other bones (metacarpals, metatarsals, phalanges, spine) grow by a combination of appositional and endochondral ossification.

Important Growth and Developmental Milestones

Table 713.2 summarizes some important musculoskeletal growth
considerations.

4193
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4194 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
17 y
11-14 y
13-15 y
14-15 y

14 y
13-15 y

1-2 y

Epiphysis

Ossification center
Reserve cartilage
Proliferating cells
Vacuolating cells
Calcified cartilage
Primary spongiosa

4m

0-3 m

Articular cartilage

4-6 y
11-12 y

Physis

Secondary spongiosa
Cancellous bone

Osteoclast

Metaphysis

Osteoblast
12 y M
11 y F
1-2 m M
1-6 m F

Compact bone

5-7 y M
3-6 y F
39 wk fetal

8-10 y M
7-9 y F

3-5 y
3-4 y

3-6 y

8-10 y

3-18 m

4-9 y

Diaphysis

Birth

Fig. 713.3 Functional components of the growing end of a tubular

bone and their anatomic substrate. (From Kan JH, Strouse PJ. Embryology, anatomy, and normal findings. In: Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric
Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2019: Fig. 128.5)

6m

9-12 m

Table 713.2  Skeletal Growth Considerations

A

B

Fig. 713.1 Ages of onset of secondary (epiphyseal and apophyseal)

ossification of the major bones of the upper (A) and lower (B) extremity.
F, Female; M, male; m, month; wk, week; y, year. (From Caffey J. Pediatric X-­ray Diagnosis, 8th ed. Chicago: Year Book, 1985.)

Epiphysis
Metaphysis

Epiphyseal plate (physis)
enclosed by perichondrial ring

• Abnormal stature can be assessed as “proportionate” or
“disproportionate” based on comparing the ratio of sitting height
with sub-­ischial height (lower limbs).
• Normally the arm span is almost equal to standing height.
• The head is disproportionately large at birth, and the ratio of head
height to total height is approximately 1:4 at birth, which changes
to 1:7.5 at skeletal maturity.
• Lower extremities account for approximately 15% of height at
birth and 30% at skeletal maturity.
• The rate of height and growth increase is not constant and varies
with growth spurts.
• By age 5, birth height usually doubles, and the child is
approximately 60% of adult height. The child is approximately
80% of final height at 9 yr old. During puberty, the standing height
increases by approximately 1 cm/mo.
• Bone age is more important than chronological age in
determining future growth potential.

Periosteum

Diaphysis

Medullary
canal
Compact
bone

Compact bone
cross section
Haversian

In the hip joint, the acetabulum forms with the convergence of three
primary ossification centers: ischium, ilium, and pubis.

GAIT/FUNCTIONAL MATURATION

Fig. 713.2 Diagram showing typical long bone divisions.

Growth Patterns in Upper and Lower Extremities

The upper extremity grows longitudinally, primarily from physes of the
proximal humeral physis and the distal radial and ulnar physes. In the
lower extremity, most of the longitudinal growth occurs around the
knee, in the distal femoral and the proximal tibial physes (Fig. 713.4).

Functional mobility develops in infants in a predictable fashion
(Table 713.3). Failure to achieve functional milestones is an indication for referral to a neurologist to determine if a central nervous
system (CNS) problem exists. CNS maturation contributes significantly to the development of gait. In early ambulation (at 8-15
months), the child usually has a wide-­based gait with hyperflexion
of hips and knees, and initial contact with the heel. By the age of 2
years, the wide gait diminishes, reciprocal arm swing begins, and
there is increased stride length and velocity. Adult fluid gait patterns usually start developing by 3 years and mature to an adult-­like
pattern by age 7 years.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 714 u Orthopedic Evaluation of the Child
COMPLETE
LIMB

LIMB
SEGMENT

15%

30%

cm/yr
0.8 (0.8)

37%

70%

1.2 (1.4)

28%

60%

0.9 (1.1)

COMPLETE
LIMB

LIMB
SEGMENT

40%

60%

cm/yr
1.04

10%
10%

20%
20%
25%

0.26
0.22 Ulna
0.25 Radius

75%
80%

0.75 Radius
0.9 Ulna

40%

20%

40%

0.7 (0.8)

Fig. 713.4 The contribution (%) of each physis to the overall length of
the extremities. (From Morrissy R, Weinstein S, eds. Lovell and Winter’s
Pediatric Orthopedics, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
2001.)

Table 713.3  Functional Milestones
MILESTONE

ACHIEVED BY

Head control

3-6 mo

Sitting

6-9 mo

Crawling

8 mo

Pulling to stand

8-12 mo

Ambulating

12-18 mo

Chapter 714

Orthopedic Evaluation of
the Child
Kathleen J. Maguire and Lawrence Wells

4195

Table 714.1  Characterization of Pain and Presenting
Symptom
Location: Whether pain is localized to a particular segment or
involves a larger area.
Intensity: Usually on a pain scale of 1-10 to indicate severity.
Quality: Tumor pain is often unrelenting, progressive, and present
during the night. Pain at night particularly suggests osteoid
osteoma. Pain in inflammation and infection is usually continuous.
Onset: Was it acute and related to specific trauma or was it
insidious? Acute pain and history of trauma are more commonly
associated with fractures.
Duration: Whether transient, only lasting for minutes, or lasting for
hours or days. Pain lasting for longer than 3-4 weeks suggests a
serious underlying problem.
Progress: Whether static, increasing, or decreasing.
Radiation: Pain radiating to upper or lower extremities or complaints
of numbness, tingling, or weakness require appropriate workup.
Aggravating factors: Relationship to any activities, movements, or
particular positions.
Alleviating factors: Is the pain relieved by rest, heat/ice, and/
or medication? Conditions such as spondylolysis, Scheuermann
disease, inflammatory spondyloarthropathy, muscle pulls, or
overuse are improved by bed rest.
Gait and posture: Disturbances associated with pain.

vitamins, use of drugs or opiates, alcohol consumption, diabetes, immunization status (including receipt of rubella vaccine), and sexually transmitted infections. The child’s prenatal and perinatal history should
include information about the length of pregnancy, length of labor, type
of labor (induced or spontaneous, Cesarean or vaginal delivery), presentation of fetus (cephalic or breech), birth trauma, evidence of any fetal
distress at delivery, requirement for supplemental oxygen after the delivery, birth length and weight, Apgar score, muscle tone at birth, feeding
history, and period of hospitalization. In older infants and young children, evaluation of developmental milestones for posture, locomotion,
dexterity, social activities, and speech are important. Specific orthopedic
questions should focus on joint, muscular, appendicular, or axial skeleton complaints. Information regarding pain or other symptoms in any
of these areas should be elicited (Table 714.1). The family history can give
clues to heritable disorders. It also can forecast expectations of the child’s
future development and allow appropriate interventions as necessary.

PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

The orthopedic physical examination includes a thorough examination
of the musculoskeletal system along with a comprehensive neurologic
examination. The examination may vary depending on the age of the
child. The musculoskeletal examination includes inspection, palpation,
and evaluation of motion, strength, stability, and gait. A basic neurologic examination includes sensory examination, motor function, and
reflexes. The orthopedic physical examination requires basic knowledge of anatomy of joint range of motion, alignment, and stability.
Many common musculoskeletal disorders can be diagnosed by the history and physical examination alone. One screening tool that has been
useful in children is the pediatric gait, arms, legs, spine (pGALS) test,
the components of which are shown in Figure 714.1.

Inspection
A detailed history and thorough physical examination are critical to
the evaluation of a child with an orthopedic problem. The child’s family
and acquaintances are important sources of information, especially in
younger children and infants. Appropriate radiographic imaging and,
occasionally, laboratory testing may be necessary to support the clinical diagnosis.

HISTORY

A comprehensive history should include details about the prenatal, perinatal, and postnatal periods. Prenatal history should include information about maternal health, including smoking history, use of prenatal

Initial examination of the child begins with inspection. The patient
should be comfortable with adequate exposure and well-­lit surroundings
(lest some important physical findings be missed). Infants or young
children may be examined on their parent’s lap so that they feel more
secure and are more likely to be cooperative. The clinician should use
the guidelines listed in Table 714.2 during inspection.

Palpation

Palpation of the involved region should include assessment of local
temperature and tenderness; assessment for a swelling or mass, lymphadenopathy, spasticity or contracture, and bone or joint deformity; and
evaluation of anatomic axis of limb and of limb lengths.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4196 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Gait

A “Walk on your tip-toes.”
*Observe the child walking

B “Walk on your heels.” *Observe
the child walking

Arms

C “Put your hands out in front of
you.”

D “Turn your hands over and make E “Touch the tips of your fingers
a fist. Pinch your index finger
with your thumb.”
and thumb together.”

F Squeeze metacarpophalangeal
joints

G “Put your hands together.”*

H “Put your hands back to back.”*

I “Reach up and touch the sky.*
Look at the ceiling.”

J “Put your hands behind your
neck.”

L “Bend and then straighten your
knee.” (active movement of
knees and examiner feels for
crepitus)

M Passive flexion (90 degrees)
with internal rotation of hip

Legs

K Feel for effusion at the knee

Spine

N “Open your mouth and put 3 O Lateral flexion of cervical
of your (child’s own) fingers
spine: “Try and touch your
in your mouth.”*
shoulder with your ear.”

P Observe spine from behind

Q “Can you bend and touch
your toes?” Observe curve
of spine from side and
behind

Fig. 714.1 The components of pediatric gait, arms, legs, spine (pGALS) screen, with illustration of movement. Screening questions: (1) Do you

have any pain or stiffness in your joints, muscles, or back? (2) Do you have any difficulty getting yourself dressed without any help? (3) Do you have
any difficulty going up and down stairs? *Additions and amendments to the original adult gait, arms, legs, spine screen. (From Foster HE, Kay
LJ, Friswell M, et al. Musculoskeletal screening examination [pGALS] for school-­age children based on the adult GALS screen. Arthritis Rheum.
2006;55:709–716.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 714 u Orthopedic Evaluation of the Child
Table 714.2  Guidelines During Inspection of a Child with
Musculoskeletal Problem

Table 714.3  Beighton Grading for Hypermobility

• It is important to inspect how the patient moves about in the
room before and during the examination, as well as during various
maneuvers. Balance, posture, and gait pattern should also be
evaluated.
• General examination findings should include inspection for skin
rashes, café-­au-­lait spots, hairy patches, dimples, cysts, tuft of hair,
or evidence of spinal midline defects that can indicate serious
underlying problems that need review.
• General body habitus, including signs of cachexia, pallor, and
nutritional deficiencies, should be noted.
• In the setting of trauma, inspection of the injured limb should
note deformity, swelling, erythema, and ecchymosis about a joint
and/or long bone of the appendicular skeleton.
• Inspect the appendicular skeleton for evidence of deformity.
Note if the deformity appears centered at a joint, bone, or within
soft tissue. Attempt correction of the deformity to assess if it is
correctible/flexible or fixed.
• Note any obvious spinal asymmetry, axial deformities, trunk
decompensation, and evidence of muscle spasm or contractures.
The forward bending test is valuable in assessing asymmetry and
movement of the spine.
• Any discrepancies in limb lengths, as well as muscle atrophy,
should be recorded.

DESCRIPTION

4197

BILATERAL
TESTING

SCORE (MAX.
POINTS)

Passive dorsiflexion of the
fifth metacarpophalangeal
joint to >90 degrees

Yes

2

Passive hyperextension of the
elbow >10 degrees

Yes

2

Passive hyperextension of the
knee >10 degrees

Yes

2

Passive apposition of the
thumb to the flexor side of
the forearm, while shoulder
is flexed 90 degrees, elbow
is extended, and hand is
pronated

Yes

2

Forward flexion of the trunk,
with the knees straight, so
that the palms of the hands
rest easily on the floor

No

1

Total

9

From Smits-­Engelsman, B, Klerks M, Kirby A. Beighton Score: a valid measure for
generalized hypermobility in children. J Pediatr. 2011;158:119–123. Table 1.

Contractures are a loss of mobility of a joint from congenital or acquired
causes and are caused by periarticular soft tissue fibrosis or involvement
of muscles crossing the joint. Congenital contractures are common in
arthrogryposis (see Chapter 723). Spasticity is an abnormal increase in
tone associated with hyperreflexia and is common in cerebral palsy.
Deformity of the bone or joint is an abnormal fixed shape or position from congenital or acquired causes. It is important to assess the
type of deformity, its location, and degree of deformity on clinical
examination. It is also important to assess whether the deformity is
fixed or can be passively or actively corrected, and whether there is any
associated muscle spasm, local tenderness, or pain on motion. Classification of the deformity depends on the plane of deformity: varus (apex
away from midline) or valgus (apex toward midline), or flexion and
extension (in the sagittal plane). In the axial skeleton, especially the
spine, deformity can be defined as scoliosis, kyphosis, hyperlordosis,
and kyphoscoliosis (see Chapter 720).

Range of Motion

Active and passive joint motion should be assessed, recorded, and
compared with the opposite side. Baseline flexibility or hypermobility
beyond the range of normal motion should be noted. The Beighton
score for hyperflexibility has been validated in children and serves to
establish underlying laxity in the pediatric population (Table 714.3).
Objective evaluation should be done with a goniometer and recorded.
Vocabulary for direction of joint motion is as follows:
Abduction: Away from the midline
Adduction: Toward the midline
Flexion: Movement of bending from the starting position
Extension: Movement from bending to the starting position
Hyperextension: Movement in extension beyond the starting position
Supination: Rotating the forearm to face the palm upward
Pronation: Rotating the forearm to face the palm downward
Inversion: Turning the hindfoot inward
Eversion: Turning the hindfoot outward
Plantar flexion: Pointing the toes away from the body (toward the
floor)
Dorsiflexion: Pointing the toes toward the body (toward the ceiling)
Internal rotation: Turning inward toward the axis of the body
External rotation: Turning outward away from the axis of the body

Table 714.4  Normal Upper Extremity Motion in Children
in Degrees
MOTION

VALUE (IN DEGREES)

Shoulder elevation

180

Shoulder internal rotation

50-60

Shoulder external rotation

40-45

Shoulder extension

45-55

Shoulder internal rotation at 90
degrees of abduction

70

Shoulder external rotation at 90
degrees of abduction

100

Elbow flexion

145-150

Elbow extension

4-7

Adapted from Payares-­Lizano M, Pino C. Pediatric orthopedic examination. Pediatr Clin
North Am. 2020;67(1):1–21. Table 5; with additional data from McKay MJ, Baldwin JN,
Ferreira P, et al. Normative reference values for strength and flexibility of 1,000 children
and adults. Neurology. 2017;88(1):36–43.

Normal ranges of motion for the appendicular skeleton are noted
in Table 714.4 (upper extremity), Table 714.5 (hip), and Table 714.6
(lower extremity).

NEUROLOGIC EVALUATION

A careful neurologic evaluation is part of every pediatric musculoskeletal examination (see Chapter 630). The assessment should include
evaluation of developmental milestones, muscle strength (Table 714.7),
sensory assessment, muscle tone, and deep tendon reflexes. The neurologic evaluation should also assess the spine and identify any deformity, such as scoliosis and kyphosis, or abnormal spinal mobility. The
hips and feet should also be examined specifically, along with torsional

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4198 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 714.5  Normal Hip Range of Motion in Children in Degrees
MOTION

AGE 2-5 (MALE/FEMALE)

AGE 6-10 (MALE/FEMALE)

AGE 11-17 (MALE/FEMALE)

Abduction

51/53

43/51

34/44

Adduction

17/18

15/18

14/17

Flexion

118/121

118/122

113/120

Extension

21/21

19/21

15/22

Internal rotation in flexion

45/47

40/41

35/35

External rotation in flexion

51/49

44/48

40/46

Internal rotation in extension

47/51

42/47

36/42

External rotation in extension

47/50

42/45

39/44

From Sankar WN, Laird CT, Baldwin KD. Hip range of motion in children: what is the norm? J Pediatr Orthop. 2012;32(4):399–405. Table 1.

Table 714.6  Normal Lower Extremity Motion in Children
in Degrees
MOTION

AGE 3-9 (MALE/
FEMALE)

AGE 10-19 (MALE/
FEMALE)

Knee flexion

145/144

140/142

Knee extension

4/4

2/2

Ankle dorsiflexion

33/31

32/31

Ankle plantarflexion

63/63

58/63

Table 714.8  Ashworth Scale of Spasticity
0

No increase in muscle tone

1

Slight increase in muscle tone, usually a catch or minimal
resistance at end range of motion

2

Moderate tone throughout range of motion

3

Considerable increase in tone; passive range of motion
difficult

4

Rigid in flexion or extension

Adapted from McKay MJ, Baldwin JN, Ferreira P, et al. Normative reference values for
strength and flexibility of 1,000 children and adults. Neurology. 2017;88(1):36–43. Table
e-4.

Table 714.9  Clinical Scale of Extremity Motor Control
GRADE

DEFINITION

1

Hypotonic, no volitional motion

DESCRIPTION

2

Hypertonic, no volitional motion

Grade 5

Normal

3

Mass flexion or extension in response to a stimulus

Grade 4

Movement against gravity and resistance

4

Grade 3

Movement against gravity over (almost) full
range

Patient can initiate movement but results in mass flexion
or extension

5

Grade 2

Movement of the limb with gravity eliminated

Slow volitional movement; stress or rapid movement
results in mass action

Grade 1

Visible contraction without movement of the
limb

6

Volitional control of specific joints/muscles

Grade 0

No visible contraction

Table 714.7  Medical Research Council (MRC) Scale for
Muscle Strength
MUSCLE GRADE

Data from Medical Research Council.

abnormalities of the lower extremity, which are vastly more common
in the neurologically involved population. Specific peripheral nerve
examinations may be necessary.
When the nervous system matures, the developing cerebral cortex normally inhibits rudimentary reflexes that are often present at
birth (see Chapter 630). Therefore, persistence of these reflexes can
indicate neurologic abnormality. The most commonly performed
deep tendon reflex tests include biceps, triceps, quadriceps, and gastrocnemius and soleus tendons. Upper motor neuron signs should
also be noted. The Ashworth scale is often used to grade spasticity (Table 714.8). Upper-­extremity motor control is often graded,
and these grades are useful both diagnostically and prognostically.
Passive range of motion should be assessed to determine extremity
motor control (Table 714.9). Localized or diffuse weakness must be

determined and documented. A thorough assessment and grading
of muscle strength is mandatory in all cases of neuromuscular disorders (see Table 714.7).

Gait Assessment

Children typically begin walking between 8 and ­16 months of age.
Early ambulation is characterized by short stride length, a fast
cadence, and slow velocity with a wide-­based stance. The gait cycle
is a single sequence of functions that starts with heel strike, foot
flat, heel off, toe off, and swing. These events describe one gait cycle
and include two phases: stance and swing. The stance phase is the
period during which the foot is in contact with the ground. The
swing phase is the portion of the gait cycle during which a limb is
being advanced forward without ground contact. Normal gait is a
symmetric and smooth process. Deviation from the norm indicates
potential abnormality and should trigger investigation.
Neurologic maturation is necessary for the development of gait
and the normal progression of developmental milestones. A child’s

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 714 u Orthopedic Evaluation of the Child
Table 714.10  Causes of Gait Disturbances
MECHANICAL
Acute injuries (accidental or nonaccidental)
Overuse conditions (mainly sports-­related)
Dysplastic lesions
Limb length discrepancy

Table 714.11  Differential Diagnosis of Limping in
Children by Age
AGE GROUP

DIAGNOSTIC CONSIDERATIONS

Early walker:
1-3 yr

PAINFUL LIMP
Septic arthritis and osteomyelitis
Transient synovitis
Fracture
Occult trauma (toddler’s fracture)
Intervertebral diskitis
Malignancy
Abuse (nonaccidental trauma)
Rheumatologic disorders (e.g., juvenile
idiopathic arthritis)

OSSEOUS
Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease
Osteochondritis dissecans of knee and talus
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis
Osteomyelitis
Spondylodiscitis
Osteoid osteoma or other primary bone tumor
ARTICULAR
Developmental hip dysplasia
Septic arthritis
Transient synovitis
Rheumatic disease (juvenile idiopathic arthritis, systemic lupus
erythematosus)
Hemophilia-­related hemorrhage
Ankylosis of a joint

PAINLESS LIMP
Developmental dysplasia of the hip
Neuromuscular disorder
Polio
Cerebral palsy
Lower extremity length inequality
Child: 3-10 yr

NEUROLOGIC
Guillain-­Barré syndrome and other peripheral neuropathies
Intoxication
Cerebellar ataxia
Brain tumor
Lesion occupying spinal cord space
Posterior column spinal cord disorders
Myopathy
Hemiplegia
Complex regional pain syndrome
Cerebral palsy
HEMATOLOGIC/ONCOLOGIC
Sickle cell pain crisis
Leukemia, lymphoma
Metastatic tumor
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
OTHER
Soft tissue infection
Myositis
Fasciitis
Bursitis
Kawasaki disease
Conversion disorder
Gaucher disease
Phlebitis
Scurvy
Rickets
Peritonitis
From Kliegman RM, Lye PS, Bordini BJ, et al., eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based
Diagnosis. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2018: Table 34.1, p. 615.

gait changes with neurologic maturation. Toddlers normally walk
with greater hip and knee flexion, flexed arms, and a wider base
of gait than older children. As the neurologic system continues to
develop in the cephalocaudal direction, the efficiency and smoothness of gait increase. The gait characteristics of a 7-­year-­old child
are similar to those of an adult. When the neurologic system is
abnormal (e.g., cerebral palsy), gait can be disturbed, exhibiting
pathologic reflexes and abnormal movements.
Deviations from normal gait occur in a variety of orthopedic conditions. Disorders that result in muscle weakness (e.g., spina bifida, muscular dystrophy), spasticity (e.g., cerebral palsy), or contractures (e.g.,
arthrogryposis) lead to abnormalities in gait. Other causes of gait disturbances include limp, pain, torsional variations (in-­toeing and out-­
toeing), toe walking, joint abnormalities, and leg-­length discrepancy
(Tables 714.10 and 714.11).

4199

PAINFUL LIMP
Septic arthritis, osteomyelitis, myositis
Transient synovitis
Trauma, fracture
Rheumatologic disorders
Spondylodiscitis
Malignancy
PAINLESS LIMP
Developmental dysplasia of the hip
Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease
Lower extremity length inequality
Neuromuscular disorder (e.g., muscular
dystrophy)
Polio
Cerebral palsy

Adolescent:
11 yr to
maturity

PAINFUL LIMP
Septic arthritis, osteomyelitis, myositis
Trauma (including overuse injuries and fractures)
Rheumatologic disorder
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis (acute,
unstable)
Malignancy
Osteochondritis dissecans
PAINLESS LIMP
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis (chronic,
stable)
Developmental dysplasia of the hip (acetabular
dysplasia)
Lower extremity length inequality
Neuromuscular disorder

Modified from Marcdante K, Kliegman R, eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics, 7th ed.
Philadelphia: Saunders, 2015.

LIMPING

A thorough history and clinical examination are the first steps toward
early identification of the underlying problem causing a limp. Limping
can be considered either painful (antalgic) or painless, with the differential diagnosis ranging from benign to serious causes (e.g., septic
hip, tumor). In a painful gait, the stance phase is shortened as the child
decreases the time spent on the painful extremity. In a painless gait,
which indicates underlying proximal muscle weakness or hip instability, the stance phase is equal between the involved and uninvolved
sides, but the child leans or shifts the center of gravity over the involved
extremity for balance. A bilateral disorder produces a waddling gait.
Trendelenburg gait (i.e., trunk lists to the affected side with each step)
is produced by weak abnormal hip abductors. When the patient stands
on one foot, a Trendelenburg sign (i.e., sagging rather than rising of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4200 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
the unsupported buttock) can often be elicited when abductors are
weak.
Disorders most commonly responsible for an abnormal gait generally vary based on the age of the patient. The differential diagnosis of
limping varies based on age group (see Table 714.11) or mechanism.
Neurologic disorders, especially spinal cord, muscle, or peripheral
nerve disorders, can also produce limping and difficulty walking. Antalgic gait is predominantly a result of trauma, infection, or pathologic
fracture. Trendelenburg gait is generally caused by congenital, developmental, or muscular disorders. In some cases, limping also may be
caused by nonskeletal causes, such as testicular torsion, inguinal hernia, and appendicitis.

BACK PAIN

Children frequently have a specific skeletal pathology as the cause
of back pain. The most common causes of back pain in children are
trauma, spondylolysis, spondylolisthesis, and infection (see Chapter
720.5). Tumor and tumor-­like lesions that cause back pain in children are likely to be missed unless a thorough clinical assessment
and adequate workup are performed when required. Nonorthopedic
causes of back pain include urinary tract infections, nephrolithiasis,
and pneumonia.

RADIOGRAPHIC ASSESSMENT

Plain radiographs are the first step in evaluation of most musculoskeletal disorders. Advanced imaging includes MRI, nuclear bone scans,
ultrasonography, CT, and positron emission tomography. Rapid short
tau inversion recovery (STIR) MRI is a valuable screening test if a specific location is not well defined.

Plain Radiographs

Routine radiographs consist of anteroposterior and lateral views
of the involved area with inclusion of one joint above and below
the site of symptoms. Comparison views of the opposite side,
if uninvolved, may be helpful in difficult situations but are not
always necessary. Specialized views for each joint, such as oblique
views, may offer more specific and tailored imaging for an individual fracture or other condition. It is important for the clinician
to be aware of normal radiographic variants of the immature skeleton, including when to expect to see development and ultimately
closure of growth centers about the joints. Several synchondroses may be mistaken for fractures. A patient with “normal” plain
radiographic appearance but having persistent pain or symptoms might need to be evaluated further with additional imaging
studies.

Ultrasonography

Ultrasonography is useful to evaluate suspected fluid-­filled lesions
such as popliteal cysts and hip joint effusions. Major indications for
ultrasonography are fetal studies of the extremities and spine (including detection of congenital anomalies like spondylocostal dysostosis
or osteogenesis imperfecta), developmental dysplasia of the hip in
children 6 weeks to 6 months of age, joint effusions, occult neonatal
spinal dysraphism, foreign bodies in soft tissues, and popliteal cysts
of the knee.

Magnetic Resonance Imaging

MRI is the imaging modality of choice for defining the exact anatomic extent of most musculoskeletal lesions (particularly if the
structure is soft tissue). MRI avoids ionizing radiation and does not
cause any known harmful effects. It produces excellent anatomic
images of the musculoskeletal system, including the soft tissue,
bone marrow cavity, spinal cord, and brain. It is especially useful

for defining the extent of soft tissue lesions, infections, and injuries.
Tissue planes are well delineated, allowing more accurate assessment of tumor invasion into adjacent structures. Cartilage structures can be visualized and differentiated (e.g., articular cartilage
of the knee can be distinguished from the fibrocartilage of the
meniscus). MRI is also helpful in visualizing unossified joints in
the pediatric population, including the shoulders, elbows, and hips
of young infants.

Magnetic Resonance Angiography

Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) has largely replaced routine
angiography in the preoperative assessment of vascular lesions and
bone tumors. MRA provides good visualization of peripheral vascular branches and tumor neovascularity in patients with primary bone
tumors.

Computed Tomography

CT has enhanced the evaluation of multiple musculoskeletal disorders. Coronal, sagittal, and axial imaging is possible with CT,
including three-­dimensional reconstructions that can be beneficial
in evaluating complex lesions of the axial and appendicular skeleton. It allows for visualization of the detailed bone anatomy and
the relationship of bones to contiguous structures. CT is useful to
readily evaluate tarsal coalition, accessory navicular bone, infection, growth plate arrest, osteoid osteoma, pseudoarthrosis, femoroacetabular impingement, complex fracture patterns (periarticular
and intra-­articular), bone and soft tissue tumors, spondylolysis, and
spondylolisthesis. CT is superior to MRI for assessing bone involvement and cortical destruction (even subtle changes), including calcification or ossification and fracture (particularly if displacement
of an articular fracture is suspected).

Nuclear Medicine Imaging

A bone scan displays physiologic information rather than pure
anatomy and relies on the emission of energy from the nucleotide
injected into the patient. Indications include early septic arthritis,
osteomyelitis, avascular necrosis, tumors (osteoid osteoma), metastatic lesions, occult and stress fractures, and cases of nonaccidental
trauma.
Total-­body radionuclide scan (technetium-99) is useful to identify bony lesions, inflammatory tumors, and stress fractures. Tumor
vascularity can also be inferred from the flow phase and the blood
pool images. Gallium or indium scans have high sensitivity for local
infections. Thallium-201 chloride scintiscans have >90% sensitivity and 80–90% accuracy in detecting malignant bone or soft tissue tumors. MRI has supplanted nuclear medicine imaging in many
circumstances.

LABORATORY STUDIES

Laboratory tests are occasionally necessary in the evaluation of a
child with musculoskeletal disorder. These may include a complete
blood cell count; erythrocyte sedimentation rate; C-­reactive protein
assay; Lyme titers; and blood, wound, joint, periosteum, or bone
cultures for infectious conditions such as septic arthritis or osteomyelitis. Rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies, and human
leukocyte antigen B27 may be necessary for children with suspected
rheumatologic disorders. Creatine kinase, aldolase, aspartate aminotransferase, and dystrophin testing are indicated in children with
suspected disorders of striated muscle, such as Duchenne muscular
dystrophy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 715 u The Foot and Toes

Chapter 715

The Foot and Toes
Christine M. Goodbody, Jennifer J. Winell,
and Richard S. Davidson
Abnormalities affecting the osseous and articular structures of the foot
may be congenital, developmental, neuromuscular, inflammatory, or
acquired. Problems with the foot and/or toes may be associated with a
host of connective tissue diseases and syndromes, and overuse syndromes
are commonly observed in young athletes. Symptoms may include pain
and difficulty with shoe wear, and cosmetic concerns are common. The
foot may be divided into the forefoot (toes and metatarsals), the midfoot
(cuneiforms, navicular, cuboid), and the hindfoot (talus and calcaneus).
Although the tibiotalar joint (ankle) provides plantarflexion and dorsiflexion, the subtalar joint (between the talus and calcaneus) is oriented
obliquely, providing inversion and eversion. Inversion represents a combination of plantarflexion and varus, whereas eversion involves dorsiflexion and valgus. The subtalar joint is especially important for walking on
uneven surfaces. Inversion of the transverse tarsal (Chopart) joint locks
the midfoot to provide a stable base on which to perform toe-­off during
the gait cycle. Eversion of the transverse tarsal joint unlocks the hindfoot
to provide accommodation during heel strike of the of the gait cycle. The
talonavicular and calcaneocuboid joints connect the midfoot with the
hindfoot.

4201

TREATMENT

The treatment of metatarsus adductus is based on the rigidity of the deformity, but most children respond to nonoperative treatment. Deformities
that are flexible and overcorrect into abduction with passive manipulation
may be observed. Those feet that correct just to a neutral position may benefit from stretching exercises, which can be demonstrated to the parents in
the office. In a walking child, the parents can try reversing the shoes as well.
If this is not effective, reverse-­last shoes can be prescribed to maintain the
abducted position of foot. These are worn full-­time (22 hours/day), and the
condition is reevaluated in 4-6 months. The position of the heel bisector
can be followed over the course of observation or treatment to monitor
for improvement. If improvement occurs, treatment can be continued for
an additional year or more. If there is no improvement, serial plaster casts
should be considered. When stretching a foot with metatarsus adductus,
care should be taken to maintain the hindfoot in neutral to slight varus
alignment to avoid creating hindfoot valgus. Feet that cannot be corrected
to a neutral position may benefit from initial serial casting; the best results
are obtained when treatment is started before 8 months of age. In addition to stretching the soft tissues, the goal is to alter physeal growth and
stimulate remodeling, resulting in permanent correction. Once flexibility
and alignment are restored, orthoses, corrective shoes, or wearing shoes
on opposite feet is generally recommended for 6-12 months. A dynamic
hallux varus usually improves spontaneously, and no active treatment is
required.
Surgical treatment may be considered in the small subset of patients
with symptomatic residual deformities who have not responded to treatment. Surgery is generally delayed until children are 4-6 years of age.
Cosmesis is often a concern, and pain and/or the inability to wear certain types of shoes may occasionally lead patients to consider surgery.

715.1 Metatarsus Adductus
Christine M. Goodbody, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Richard S. Davidson
Metatarsus adductus involves adduction of the forefoot relative to the
hindfoot. When the forefoot is adducted, and sometimes in supination,
the deformity is termed metatarsus varus (Fig. 715.1). The disorder is
common in newborns, most frequently caused by intrauterine molding (deformation); the deformity is bilateral in 50% of cases. A careful
hip and neck examination must always be performed to look for other
abnormalities associated with intrauterine positioning.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The forefoot is adducted (occasionally supinated), whereas the midfoot
and hindfoot are normal. The lateral border of the foot is convex, and the
base of the fifth metatarsal appears prominent. Range of motion at the
ankle and subtalar joints is normal. Both the magnitude and the degree of
flexibility should be documented. When the normal foot is viewed from
the plantar surface, a line through the midpoint of (and parallel to) the
heel should extend through the second toe. In metatarsus adductus, the
line extends laterally to the second toe. Flexibility is assessed by stabilizing
the hindfoot and midfoot in a neutral position with one hand and applying
pressure over the first metatarsal head with the other. Correction with little
pressure is indicative of a more flexible deformity. In the walking child with
an uncorrected metatarsus adductus deformity, an in-­toe gait and abnormal shoe wear may occur. A subset of patients will also have a dynamic
adduction deformity of the great toe (hallux varus), which is often most
noticeable during ambulation. This usually improves spontaneously and
does not require treatment.

A

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION

B

Radiographs are not performed routinely in infants with metatarsus
adductus. Older children with residual deformity should have anteroposterior (AP) and lateral weight-­bearing or simulated weight-­bearing radiographs. The AP radiographs demonstrate adduction of the metatarsals at
the tarsometatarsal articulation and an increased intermetatarsal angle
between the first and second metatarsals.

Fig. 715.1 Bilateral mild metatarsus adductus. A, Dorsal view show-

ing medial deviation of all the metatarsals. B, Plantar view showing the
“bean-­shaped” foot. This type of foot is easily corrected with serial
casting. (From Ricco AI. Disorders of the foot. In: Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s Pediatric Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig.
19-19.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4202 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Options for surgical treatment include either soft tissue releases or osteotomies depending on age, anatomy, deformity flexibility, and other
patient-­specific factors. An osteotomy (midfoot or multiple metatarsals)
is most likely to result in permanent restoration of alignment.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

715.2 Calcaneovalgus Feet
Christine M. Goodbody, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Richard S. Davidson
A common finding in the newborn, the calcaneovalgus foot occurs secondary to in utero positioning (deformation). Excessive dorsiflexion and
eversion are observed in the hindfoot, and the forefoot may be abducted.
There may be an associated external tibial torsion (see Chapter 716).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

A

B

The infant typically presents with the foot dorsiflexed and everted, and
occasionally the dorsum of the foot or toes will be in contact with the
anterolateral surface of the lower leg (Fig. 715.2). Dimpling may be indicative of reduced subcutaneous fat at the dorsolateral ankle. Plantarflexion
and inversion are often restricted. A careful hip examination should be
performed, and if there is any concern, hip ultrasonography should be
considered. When comparing risk for developmental dysplasia of the hip
(DDH) with other congenital foot deformities, congenital calcaneovalgus
has the highest association, with 6.1–19.4% of patients having coexisting
DDH. The calcaneovalgus foot may be confused with a congenital vertical
talus and may rarely be associated with a posteromedial bow of the tibia.
A calcaneovalgus deformity also may be seen in older patients, typically
those with a neuromuscular imbalance involving weakness or paralysis of
the gastrocsoleus muscle (e.g., polio, myelomeningocele).

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION

Radiographs are usually not required but should be ordered if the
deformity fails to correct spontaneously or with early treatment. AP
and lateral radiographs along with a lateral radiograph of the foot in
maximal plantarflexion may help distinguish calcaneovalgus from a
congenital vertical talus or congenital oblique talus. Evaluation of the
position of the talus in relation to the navicular in both the lateral and
maximally plantarflexed lateral view can help to diagnose congenital
vertical or oblique talus. If a posteromedial bow of the tibia is suspected, AP and lateral radiographs of the tibia and fibula are necessary.
In posteromedial bowing of the tibia, the deformity is located in the
tibia with the apex of deformity positioned posterior and medial. All
three conditions may be confused clinically with calcaneovalgus feet.

TREATMENT

Mild cases of calcaneovalgus foot, in which full passive range of motion is
present at birth, require no active treatment. These usually resolve within
the first few weeks of life. A gentle stretching program focusing on plantarflexion and inversion is recommended for cases with some restriction
in motion. For cases with a greater restriction in mobility, serial casts
may be considered to restore motion and alignment, although casting is
rarely required in the treatment of calcaneovalgus feet. Unresponsive cases
should be evaluated for associated neuromuscular or other etiologies.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

715.3 Talipes Equinovarus (Clubfoot)
Christine M. Goodbody, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Richard S. Davidson
Clubfoot or congenital talipes equinovarus (CTEV) is the term used
to describe a deformity involving malalignment of the calcaneo-­
talar-­
navicular complex. Components of this deformity may be

C
Fig. 715.2 Clinical picture of calcaneovalgus foot (A) that is passively
correctable (B) and is due to intrauterine positioning (C).
best understood using the mnemonic CAVE (cavus:midfoot,
adductus:forefoot, varus:heel, equinus:hindfoot). Although this is predominantly a hindfoot deformity, it involves plantarflexion (cavus) of the
first ray (the first metatarsal and first cuneiform) and adduction of the
forefoot/midfoot on the hindfoot. The hindfoot is in varus and equinus.
The clubfoot deformity may be positional, congenital, associated with
a variety of underlying diagnoses (neuromuscular or syndromic), or a
focal dysplasia of musculoskeletal tissue distal to the knee.
The positional (or postural) clubfoot is a normal foot that has been
held in a deformed position in utero and is found to be flexible on examination in the newborn nursery. The nonpositional congenital clubfoot
can either be idiopathic or syndromic. There is a spectrum of severity, but
clubfoot associated with neuromuscular diagnoses or syndromes is typically rigid and more difficult to treat. Clubfoot is also extremely common
in patients with myelodysplasia, arthrogryposis, and chromosomal syndromes such as trisomy 18 and chromosome 22q11 deletion syndrome
(see Chapter 99).
Congenital clubfoot is seen in approximately 1-2 in 1,000 births and
most likely results from a complex multifactorial polygenic inheritance.
The risk is ∼25% when both a parent and one sibling have clubfeet. It
occurs more commonly in males (2:1) and is bilateral in 50% of cases. The
pathoanatomy involves both abnormal tarsal morphology (plantar and
medial deviation of the head and neck of the talus) and abnormal relationships between the tarsal bones in all three planes, as well as associated
contracture of the soft tissues on the plantar and medial aspects of the foot.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

A complete physical examination should be performed to rule out coexisting musculoskeletal and neuromuscular problems. The spine should
be inspected for signs of occult dysraphism. Examination of the infant

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 715 u The Foot and Toes
clubfoot demonstrates forefoot cavus and adductus and hindfoot varus
and equinus (Fig. 715.3). The degree of flexibility varies, and all patients
will exhibit calf atrophy. Internal tibial torsion, foot length shortening,
and leg-­length discrepancy (shortening of the ipsilateral extremity) will
be observed in a subset of cases. Although classically not associated with
DDH (see Chapter 719.1), there is a higher association of CTEV and DDH
than in the general population.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION

AP and lateral radiographs are not recommended for idiopathic clubfoot.
For arthrogrypotic or syndromic feet, x-­rays may be helpful but must be
performed with the foot held in the maximally corrected position. The
lateral x-­
ray should be a trans-­
malleolar view. Multiple radiographic
measurements can be made to describe malalignment between the tarsal
bones. The navicular bone does not ossify until 3-6 years of age, so the
focus of radiographic interpretation is the relationship between segments
of the foot, forefoot to hindfoot. A common radiographic finding is “parallelism” between lines drawn through the axis of the talus and the calcaneus
on the lateral radiograph, indicating hindfoot varus. X-­ray may be particularly useful for older children with persistent or recurrent deformities that
are difficult to assess.

TREATMENT

Nonoperative treatment is initiated in all infants and should be started
as soon as possible following birth. Techniques have included taping and strapping, manipulation and serial casting, and functional
treatment. Historically, a significant percentage of patients treated by
manipulation and casting required a surgical release, which was usually performed between 3 and 12 months of age. Although many feet
remain well aligned after surgical releases, a significant percentage of
patients require additional surgery for recurrent or residual deformities, and stiffness remains a concern at long-­term follow-­up. While pain
is uncommon in childhood and adolescence, symptoms may appear
during adulthood. These concerns have led to considerable interest in
less-­invasive methods for treating the deformity.
The Ponseti method of clubfoot treatment, which is the standard of
initial treatment, involves a specific technique for manipulation and
serial casting, and may be best described as minimally invasive rather
than nonoperative (Fig. 715.4). The order of correction follows the mnemonic CAVE. Weekly cast changes are performed; 5-10 casts are typically
required. The most difficult deformity to correct is the hindfoot equinus,
and ∼90% of patients will require a percutaneous tenotomy of the heel cord

A

B

4203

under local anesthesia as an outpatient. Following the tenotomy, a long
leg cast with the knee flexed 90 degrees and the foot in maximal abduction (up to 70 degrees) with 0-10 degrees of dorsiflexion is worn for 3-4
weeks. The patient then begins a bracing program. An abduction brace
(bars and shoes) is worn 22 hours a day for 3 months and then at nighttime until the age of 3-5 years. A small subset of patients (up to 20%) with
recurrent, dynamic supination deformity will require transfer of the tibialis
anterior tendon to the lateral cuneiform. The results of the Ponseti method
are excellent at up to 40 years of follow-­up. Despite casting, children do not
have much dysfunction or delay in achieving normal motor milestones.
Compliance with the bracing program is essential as recurrence is common if the brace is not worn as recommended. Minimally invasive methods are most successful when treatment is begun at birth or during the
first few months of life, and with good compliance with postmanipulation
bracing.
Aggressive surgical realignment has a definite role in the management
of clubfeet, especially in the minority of congenital clubfeet that have failed
nonoperative or minimally invasive methods, and for the neuromuscular
and rigid syndromic clubfeet. In such cases, minimally invasive methods
such as the Ponseti technique may potentially be of value in decreasing the
need for surgery or the magnitude of surgery required. Common surgical approaches include a release of the involved joints (realignment of the
tarsal bones), a lengthening of the shortened posteromedial musculotendinous units, and usually pinning of the foot in the corrected position. The
“a la carte” method allows the surgeon to apply the principles of deformity
correction to be tailored to the unique characteristics of each deformity.
For older children with untreated clubfeet or those in whom a recurrence
or residual deformity is observed, bony procedures (osteotomies) may be
required in addition to soft tissue surgery. Triple arthrodesis is reserved as
salvage for painful, deformed feet in adolescents and adults.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

715.4 Congenital Vertical Talus
Christine M. Goodbody, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Richard S. Davidson
Congenital vertical talus is an uncommon foot deformity in which the
midfoot is dorsally dislocated on the hindfoot and the ankle is in fixed
equinus. A variant form, called oblique talus, refers to subluxation of

C

Fig. 715.3 Talipes equinovarus in a newborn. A, Clinical appearance of an untreated clubfoot. B and C, Initial radiographic appearance of bilateral
untreated clubfeet. (From Ricco AI. Disorders of the foot. In: Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s Pediatric Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022:
Fig. 19-42.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4204 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

A

B

C

F

D

E

Fig. 715.4 Ponseti method of clubfoot treatment. Ponseti casts show serial correction of the patient (A-­F). The last cast (E and F) was applied after
percutaneous heel cord tenotomy. (From Ricco AI. Disorders of the foot. In: Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s Pediatric Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 19.47, p. 717.)

the talonavicular joint and is usually neuromuscular in origin. There is
nearly an even split between idiopathic cases and cases with an underlying neuromuscular condition or a syndrome. Neurologic causes
include myelodysplasia, tethered cord, and sacral agenesis. Other associated conditions include arthrogryposis, Larsen syndrome, multiple
pterygium syndrome, and chromosomal abnormalities (trisomy 13-15,
19; see Chapter 99). Depending on the age at diagnosis, the differential
diagnosis may include a calcaneovalgus foot, oblique talus (talonavicular joint reduces passively), flexible flatfoot with a tight Achilles tendon, and tarsal coalition.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Congenital vertical talus has also been described as a rocker-­bottom
foot (Fig. 715.5). The plantar surface of the foot is convex, and the talar
head is prominent along the medial border of the midfoot. The forefoot
is dorsiflexed (dorsally dislocated) and abducted relative to the hindfoot,
and the hindfoot is in equinus and valgus. There is an associated contracture of the anterolateral (toe extensors) and the posterior (Achilles tendon, peroneals) soft tissues, which may overpower a weakened posterior
tibialis and toe flexors. The deformity is typically rigid in vertical talus

and flexible in oblique talus. Physical examination is required to identify
any coexisting neurologic and/or musculoskeletal abnormalities.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION

AP, lateral, and maximal plantarflexion, and dorsiflexion lateral radiographs should be obtained when the diagnosis is suspected. The maximum plantarflexion view helps determine whether the dorsal subluxation
or dislocation of the midfoot on the hindfoot can be reduced passively,
that is, if the navicular can be aligned with the talus. The dorsiflexion
lateral view confirms the equinus contracture of the ankle. Although the
navicular does not ossify until 3-6 years of age, in younger patients the
relationship between the talus and the first metatarsal may be evaluated.

TREATMENT

The initial management consists of serial manipulation and casting,
which is started shortly after birth. A reverse Ponseti method of casting is particularly useful in stretching out the dorsiflexion and valgus
deformities. Open reduction and pin fixation can then stabilize the
midfoot, allowing simultaneous heel cord tenotomy and dorsiflexion
with casting to correct the ankle equinus.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 715 u The Foot and Toes

4205

C

A

B

D

Fig. 715.5 Congenital vertical talus. A, Pronation of the forefoot. B, Valgus of the heel. C, Absence of an arch, the rocker bottom deformity. D,

Elevation of the lateral toes and tight peroneal tendons. (From Ricco AI. Disorders of the foot. In: Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s Pediatric Orthopaedics,
6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 19-67.)

In recalcitrant cases, the competing deformities of the midfoot and
the hindfoot make conservative treatment difficult. Initially an attempt
is made to reduce the dorsal dislocation of the forefoot/midfoot on
the hindfoot. Once this has been achieved, attention can be directed
toward stretching the hindfoot contracture. These deformities are typically rigid, and surgical intervention is required in the majority of cases.
In such cases, casting still helps to stretch out the contracted soft tissues
to minimize the magnitude of surgical correction required. Surgery is
generally performed between 3 and 12 months of age as a one-­stage
procedure. This involves release/lengthening of the contracted anterior
soft tissues in concert with an open reduction and wire fixation of the
talonavicular joint, followed by a posterior release with lengthening of
the contracted musculotendinous units. Fixation with Kirschner wires
is commonly performed to maintain alignment. Postoperatively, casting is employed for a variable period of time, and afterward patients
often require the use of an orthosis for extended periods, depending
on the underlying diagnosis. Salvage options for recurrent or residual
deformities in older children include a subtalar or triple arthrodesis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

715.5 Hypermobile Pes Planus (Flexible
Flatfeet)
Christine M. Goodbody, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Richard S. Davidson
Flatfoot is a common diagnosis, and it has been estimated that up to 23% of
the public may be affected, depending on the diagnostic criteria employed.
Three types of flatfeet may be identified: a flexible flatfoot, a flexible flatfoot
with a tendo-­Achilles contracture, and a rigid flatfoot. Flatfoot describes
a change in foot shape, and there are several abnormalities in alignment
between the tarsal bones. There is eversion of the subtalar complex, valgus
alignment of the hindfoot, and midfoot sag at the naviculocuneiform and/
or the talonavicular joints. Additionally, the forefoot is abducted relative

to the hindfoot, and the head of the talus is uncovered and prominent
along the plantar and medial border of the midfoot/hindfoot. Although
hypermobile or flexible pes planus represents a common source of concern
for parents, these children are rarely symptomatic. Flatfeet are common
in neonates and toddlers and are associated with physiologic ligamentous
laxity. Improvement or correction is seen as the longitudinal arch develops
between 5 and 10 years of age in the vast majority of children. Flexible flatfeet persisting into adolescence and adulthood are usually associated with
familial ligamentous laxity (hypermobility syndromes) and often can be
identified in other family members.
Patients typically have a normal longitudinal arch when examined in a
non–weight-­bearing position or standing on the toes, but the arch flattens
when weight-­bearing. The hindfoot collapses into valgus, and the midfoot
sag becomes evident. The forefoot is supinated in weight-­bearing. Generalized hypermobility and ligamentous laxity are often observed. Range of
motion should be assessed at both the subtalar and the ankle joints. If the
heel cord is tight, the flexible fl
­ atfoot may become painful. When assessing
range of motion at the ankle, the hindfoot should always be inverted while
testing dorsiflexion to lock subtalar eversion and apparent dorsiflexion.
If the foot is neutral or everted, spurious dorsiflexion may occur through
the midfoot, masking a tendo-­Achilles contracture. If subtalar motion is
restricted, the flatfoot is considered “rigid,” and other diagnoses, such as
tarsal coalition and juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, must be considered. On
occasion, there may be tenderness and/or callus formation under the talar
head medially. The shoes should be assessed as well and may have evidence
of excessive wear along the medial border.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION

Routine radiographs of asymptomatic flexible flatfeet are usually not
indicated. If obtained for diagnostic reasons, weight-­bearing radiographs (AP and lateral) are required to assess the deformity. The foot
should be positioned in the child’s normal stance as medial rotation
and hindfoot inversion may falsely correct the flatfoot. On the AP
radiograph, there is widening of the angle between the longitudinal
axis of the talus and the calcaneus, indicating excessive heel valgus, as
well as talonavicular uncoverage and forefoot abduction. The lateral

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4206 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
view shows decreased calcaneal pitch to the tibia and distortion of the
normal straight-­line relationship between the long axis of the talus and
the first metatarsal (i.e., Meary angle) with sag, either of the talonavicular or naviculocuneiform joint, resulting in flattening of the normal
medial longitudinal arch (Fig. 715.6).

TREATMENT

Although the natural history of the flexible flatfoot remains unknown,
there is little evidence to suggest that this condition results in long-­term
problems or disability. As such, treatment is reserved for the small subset of
patients who develop symptoms. Patients may complain of hindfoot pain,
difficulty with shoe wear, or fatigue after long walking. These patients may
benefit from a nonprescription orthosis, such as a medial arch support.
However, tight heel cords, when present, must be corrected before using
arch supports. Severe cases, often associated with an underlying connective tissue disorder such as Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome (see Chapter 744) or
Down syndrome (see Chapter 99), may benefit from a custom orthosis
such as the UCBL (University of California Biomechanics Laboratory)
orthosis to better control the hindfoot and prevent collapse of the arch.
Although an orthosis may relieve symptoms, there is no evidence to suggest any permanent change in the shape of the foot or alignment of the
tarsal bones. Patients with a flexible flatfoot and a tight tendo-­Achilles
should be treated with stretching exercises. Often patients are referred to
physical therapy to ensure that they are stretching appropriately. For the
few patients with persistent pain despite conservative measures, surgical
correction of the flatfoot can be considered. This typically involves a lateral
column lengthening, which addresses all components of the deformity.
The procedure involves an osteotomy of the calcaneus, with placement
of a trapezoidal bone graft. A lengthening of the tendo-­Achilles is often
required, sometimes with a plantarflexion osteotomy of the medial cuneiform if the first ray remains supinated or in varus to restore the tripod
surface of the foot. This procedure preserves the mobility of the hindfoot
joints, in contrast to a subtalar or triple arthrodesis. Although a hindfoot
arthrodesis may correct the deformity adequately, the subsequent stress
transfer to neighboring joints may result in late-­onset, painful degenerative changes.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

715.6 Tarsal Coalition
Christine M. Goodbody, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Richard S. Davidson
Tarsal coalition, also known as peroneal spastic flatfoot, is characterized by a painful, rigid flatfoot deformity and peroneal (lateral calf)
muscle spasm without true spasticity. It represents a congenital fusion
or failure of segmentation between two or more tarsal bones. Any condition that alters the normal gliding and rotatory motion of the subtalar joint may produce the clinical appearance of a tarsal coalition. Thus

congenital malformations, arthritis, inflammatory disorders, infection,
neoplasms, and trauma can be possible causes.
The most common tarsal coalitions occur between the talus and
calcaneus at the medial talocalcaneal facet (subtalar or talocalcaneal
coalition) and between the calcaneus and navicular (calcaneonavicular
coalition). Coalitions can be fibrous, cartilaginous, or osseous. Tarsal
coalition occurs in approximately 1% of the general population and
appears to be inherited as an autosomal dominant trait with nearly
full penetrance. Approximately 60% of calcaneonavicular and 50% of
medial facet talocalcaneal coalitions are bilateral.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Approximately 25% of patients will become symptomatic, typically during
the second decade of life. Although the flatfoot and a decrease in subtalar
motion may have been present since early childhood, the onset of symptoms may correlate with the additional restriction in motion that occurs as
a cartilaginous bar ossifies, reducing flexibility. Recurrent “ankle sprains”
often accompany the presenting symptoms. The timing of ossification
varies between the talonavicular (3-5 years of age), the calcaneonavicular
(8-12 years of age), and the talocalcaneal (12-16 years of age) coalitions.
Hindfoot pain is commonly observed, especially in the region of the sinus
tarsi and under the head of the talus. Symptoms are activity related and are
often increased with running or prolonged walking, especially on uneven
surfaces. There may be tenderness over the site of the coalition and/or pain
with testing of subtalar motion. The clinical appearance of a flatfoot is seen
in both the weight-­bearing and non–weight-­bearing positions. There is a
restriction in subtalar motion.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION

AP and lateral weight-­bearing radiographs and an oblique radiograph of the foot should be obtained as well as a Harris or “heel”
view (Table 715.1). A calcaneonavicular coalition is seen best on the
oblique radiograph. On the lateral radiograph, there may be elongation of the anterior process of the calcaneus, known as the “anteater
sign” (Fig. 715.7). A talocalcaneal coalition may be seen on a Harris (axial) view of the heel. On the lateral radiograph, there may be
narrowing of the posterior facet of the subtalar joint or a C-­shaped
line along the medial outline of the talar dome and the inferior outline of the sustentaculum tali (“C sign”; Fig. 715.8). Beaking (or spur
formation) of the anterior aspect of the talus on the lateral view is
seen with some frequency and results from an alteration in the distribution of stress. Irregularity in the subchondral bony surfaces
may be seen in patients with a cartilaginous coalition, in contrast
to a well-­formed bony bridge in those with an osseous coalition. A
fibrous coalition may require additional imaging studies to diagnose.
Although plain films may be diagnostic, a CT scan is considered the
“gold standard” imaging modality when a coalition is suspected (see
Fig. 715.8). In addition to securing the diagnosis, this study helps
define the degree of joint involvement in patients with a talocalcaneal coalition. Although uncommon, more than one tarsal coalition
may be observed in the same patient. MRI is also very accurate at
detecting tarsal coalition, with a high rate of agreement with CT, and
Table 715.1  Radiographic Secondary Signs Associated
with Tarsal Coalition
Talar beaking
Posterior subtalar facet narrowing
Rounding and flattening of the lateral talar process
Hypoplasia of the talus, shortening of the talar neck
Anterior nose sign
Ball-­and-­socket ankle joint
Continuous C-­sign
Flatfoot deformity
Altered navicular morphology (wide or laterally tapering)
Dysmorphic sustentaculum tali (enlarged and ovoid on lateral
radiograph)

Fig. 715.6 Lateral weight-­bearing radiograph demonstrating features
of flatfoot.

From Slovis T, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby;
2008: p. 2604.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 715 u The Foot and Toes

4207

A
Fig. 715.7 Calcaneonavicular coalition in a child with the anteater

sign (arrow) and talar beak (dashed arrow). Elongation of the anterior
calcaneus resembling the nose of an anteater is present. (From Kan
JH, Laor T. Congenital anomalies of bone. In: Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s
Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig.
131.11, p. 1250.)

may be useful when other diagnoses for pain are suspected and CT
is diagnostically suboptimal, or in young children whose tarsal bones
are not ossified. MRI offers less radiation exposure but requires more
time and may necessitate sedation.

TREATMENT

The treatment of symptomatic tarsal coalitions varies according to the
type and extent of coalition, the age of the patient, and the presence
and magnitude of symptoms. Treatment is required only for symptomatic coalitions, and the initial management consists of activity restriction and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory medications, often with a
shoe insert such as the UCBL orthosis. Immobilization in a short leg
walking cast for 4-6 weeks may be required in patients with more pronounced symptoms or those who do not respond to initial measures.
For patients with chronic pain despite an adequate trial of nonoperative therapy, surgical treatment should be considered as persistently
symptomatic patients who are treated surgically are less likely to report
persistent problems at long-­term follow-­up. Options include resection
of the coalition, osteotomy, and/or, in extensive coalitions, arthrodesis. For the calcaneonavicular coalition, resection, and interposition
of fat, bone wax, or of the extensor digitorum brevis muscle has been
successful. Often, concomitant hindfoot valgus and contracture of the
gastrocnemius-­soleus are present. In these patients, more reliable pain
relief can be obtained with resection of the coalition, correction of the
hindfoot valgus by calcaneal lengthening osteotomy with bank bone
graft and lengthening of the gastrocnemius-­soleus complex. For those
with extensive involvement of the joint and/or degenerative changes,
a triple arthrodesis may be the best option; this is rarely needed in
adolescents.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

715.7 Cavus Feet
Christine M. Goodbody, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Richard S. Davidson
Cavus is a deformity involving plantarflexion of the forefoot or midfoot
on the hindfoot and may involve the entire forepart of the foot or just the
medial column. The result is an elevation of the medial longitudinal arch
(Fig. 715.9). A deformity of the hindfoot will often develop to compensate
for the primary forefoot abnormality. Although familial cavus may occur,
most patients with this deformity will have an underlying neuromuscular
etiology. The initial goal is to rule out, and if present, treat, any underlying causes. These diagnoses may relate to abnormalities of the spinal cord
(occult dysraphism, tethered cord, polio, myelodysplasia, etc.) and peripheral nerves (hereditary motor and sensory neuropathies [see Chapter 653],
such as Charcot-­Marie-­Tooth [CMT] disease, Dejerine-­Sottas disease, or

B
Fig. 715.8 Talocalcaneal coalition. A, A lateral radiograph demon-

strates the C sign (arrows), ovoid, elongated sustentaculum tali, and pes
planus. B, Computed tomography with coronal reformats in a different
patient demonstrates bilateral middle facet subtalar coalitions (arrowheads). (From Laor T, Kan JH. Congenital anomalies of bone. In: Coley
BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 131-13.)

Refsum disease). Although a unilateral cavus foot is most likely to result
from an occult intraspinal anomaly, bilateral involvement usually suggests
an underlying nerve or muscle disease. Cavus is commonly observed in
association with a hindfoot deformity. Two thirds of patients with pes
cavovarus have CMT, and conversely, 80% of CMT patients have pes cavovarus. In patients with hereditary motor and sensory neuropathies, progressive weakness and muscle imbalance result in plantarflexion of the first
ray and medial column. To obtain a plantigrade foot, the hindfoot must
roll into varus. With equinocavus, the hindfoot is in equinus, whereas in
calcaneocavus (usually seen in polio or myelodysplasia), the hindfoot is in
calcaneus (excessive dorsiflexion).

TREATMENT

Any underlying diagnosis must be identified, as this knowledge also
helps address the specific disorder and formulate the proper management strategy. With mild deformities, stretching through physical therapy or serial casting of the plantar fascia and contracted muscles with
exercises to strengthen weakened muscles may help delay progression. An ankle-­foot orthosis may be necessary to stabilize the foot and
improve ambulation. Surgical treatment is indicated for progressive or
symptomatic deformities that have failed to respond to nonoperative
measures or in the foot that is no longer braceable. The specific procedures recommended depend on the degree of deformity and the underlying diagnosis. In the case of a progressive neuromuscular condition,
recurrence of deformity is commonly observed, and additional procedures may be required to maintain a plantigrade foot. Families should
be counseled in detail regarding the disease process and the expected
gains from the surgery. The goal of surgery is to restore motion and
alignment, and to improve muscle balance. For milder deformities,
a soft tissue release of the plantar fascia, often combined with a tendon transfer, may suffice. For patients with a fixed bony deformity of
the forefoot, midfoot, and/or hindfoot, one or more osteotomies may
be required for realignment. A triple arthrodesis (calcaneocuboid,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4208 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

A

B

Fig. 715.10 Radiographs of Köhler disease (A) and Freiberg infracFig. 715.9 Clinical picture demonstrating pes cavus.
talonavicular, and subtalar) may be required for severe or recurrent
deformities in older patients. Long-­term bracing is usually helpful in
preventing recurrence.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

715.8 Osteochondroses/Apophysitis
Christine M. Goodbody, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Richard S. Davidson
Osteochondroses are idiopathic avascular necroses of bones,
which may involve tarsal bones as well. Although rare, they may be
observed in the tarsal navicular (Köhler disease) or the second or
third metatarsal head (Freiberg infraction; Fig. 715.10). These are
generally self-­limited conditions that commonly result in activity-­
related pain, which can at times be disabling. The treatment is based
on the degree of symptoms and most often includes restriction of
activity. The diagnosis is made by history and physical examination
in conjunction with concordant radiographic findings. The navicular is particularly sensitive, as it is the last tarsal bone to ossify,
which may lead to compression from adjacent ossified bones. For
patients with Köhler disease, nonsurgical treatment with a short leg
cast or controlled ankle motion (CAM) boot for 6-8 weeks may provide significant relief. Patients with Freiberg infraction may benefit from a period of casting and/or shoe modifications such as a
rocker-­bottom sole, a stiff-­soled shoe, or a metatarsal bar (not pads)
to offload the forefoot. Degenerative changes and collapse of the
metatarsal head will occasionally occur following the gradual healing process, and surgical intervention is required in a small subset
of cases. Procedures have included joint debridement, bone grafting, redirectional osteotomy, subtotal or complete excision of the
metatarsal head, and joint replacement.
Apophysitis represents inflammation or stress injury to the areas
on or around growth plates in children and adolescents from repetitive tensile loading and is most often observed during periods of rapid
growth. Enthesopathy refers to injury or inflammation at attachment
points of tendons to bones. Calcaneal apophysitis (Sever disease) is
the most common cause of heel pain in children; treatment includes
activity modification, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory medications, heel
cord stretching exercises, and heel cushions or arch supports. Iselin
disease represents an apophysitis at the fifth metatarsal base where the
peroneus brevis attaches and is less common. Even though the mandate for imaging heel pain in all children remains controversial, radiographs should be considered when the symptoms are unilateral or fail
to respond to treatment. Gentle stretching, a period of rest (6-8 weeks),
and avoidance of sports will often resolve symptoms, although recurrence is common until maturity when the apophyses close.

tion (B).

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

715.9 Puncture Wounds of the Foot
Christine M. Goodbody, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Richard S. Davidson
Most puncture wound injuries to the foot may be adequately managed
in the clinic or emergency department. Treatment involves a thorough
irrigation and a tetanus booster, if appropriate, and many clinicians will
recommend antibiotics. Using this approach, the majority will heal without complication. A subset of cases may develop cellulitis, most often
caused by Staphylococcus aureus, and require intravenous antibiotics with or without surgical drainage if an abscess develops. Persistent
signs of infection should be investigated more thoroughly. Deep infection is uncommon and may be associated with septic arthritis, infectious
chondritis, or osteomyelitis. The most common organisms are S. aureus
and Pseudomonas aeruginosa; the treatment involves a thorough surgical debridement followed by a short course (10-14 days) of systemic
antibiotics. Although plain radiographs will demonstrate any metallic
fragments or other radiopaque foreign bodies, ultrasonography (or CT
or MRI) may be necessary to identify radiolucent objects such as glass,
plastic, or wood. Routine empiric exploration and removal of foreign
bodies is not required but may be necessary when symptoms are present
or when an infection is suspected. Pain and/or gait disturbance is more
likely with superficial objects under the plantar surface of the foot.
A special situation occurs when a puncture wound from a nail
comes through a rubber sneaker or running shoe. This situation presents a high risk of a Pseudomonas infection, and consideration should
be given to a thorough irrigation and debridement under general anesthesia followed by systemic antibiotics for 10-14 days. Foreign-­body
entrapment of rubber may also occur.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

715.10 Toe Deformities
Christine M. Goodbody, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Richard S. Davidson

JUVENILE HALLUX VALGUS (BUNION)

Juvenile hallux valgus is approximately 10-­
fold more common in
females than in males. A family history is common and is typically
associated with familial ligamentous laxity. The etiology is multifactorial, and important factors include genetic factors, ligamentous laxity, pes planus, wearing shoes with a narrow toe box, and occasionally
spasticity (e.g., in the setting of cerebral palsy). Bunion refers to the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 715 u The Foot and Toes
bump that occurs with chronic rubbing against the prominent first
metatarsal head medially.

Clinical Manifestations

There is prominence of the first metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint
medially and often erythema and callus from chronic irritation (Fig.
715.11). The great toe metatarso-­phalangeal joint is in valgus and is
usually pronated. There is splaying (widening) of the forefoot. Pes
planus, with or without an associated heel cord contracture, is also
observed commonly. Although cosmesis is perhaps the most common
concern, patients may have pain in the region of the first MTP joint
and/or difficulty with shoe wear.

Radiographic Evaluation

Weight-­bearing AP and lateral radiographs of the feet should be
obtained. On the AP view, common measurements include the
angular relationships between the first and second metatarsals
(intermetatarsal angle, <10 degrees is normal) and between the
first metatarsal and the proximal phalanx (hallux valgus angle, <25
degrees is normal) (see Fig. 715.11). The orientation of the first
metatarsal–medial cuneiform joint is also documented. On the lateral radiograph, the angular relationship between the talus and the
first metatarsal helps identify a midfoot break associated with pes
planus. Radiographs are more helpful in surgical planning than in
establishing the diagnosis.

Treatment

Conservative management of adolescent bunions consists primarily
of shoe modifications. It is important that footwear accommodate
the width of the forefoot, or pressure on the medial prominence can
lead to callouses and pain. Patients should avoid wearing shoes with
a narrow toe box and/or a high heel. Shoe modifications, such as a
soft upper, bunion last, or heel cup, also may be recommended. In
the presence of flexible pes planus, an orthotic to restore the medial
longitudinal arch may be beneficial. If the flatfoot is rigid, further
evaluation for tarsal coalition should be pursued. If a tendo-­Achilles
contracture is present, stretching exercises are recommended. The
value of night splinting remains unproven. Surgical treatment is
reserved for those patients with persistent and disabling pain who
have failed a course of nonoperative therapy. Surgery is not advised

purely for cosmesis. Surgery is usually delayed until skeletal maturity to decrease the risk of either recurrence or overcorrection,
although guided growth via hemiepiphysiodesis in skeletally immature symptomatic patients is gaining popularity. Radiographs are
essential in preoperative planning to assess both the magnitude of
deformity (hallux valgus angle, intermetatarsal angle, distal metatarsal articular angle) and associated features such as obliquity of
the first metatarsal–medial cuneiform joint. Surgical treatment
often involves a soft tissue release and/or rebalancing procedure at
the first MTP joint, and a single or double osteotomy of the first
metatarsal to decrease foot width and realign the joints along the
medial column of the forefoot. If there is deformity in the medial
cuneiform, medial cuneiform opening wedge osteotomy and bone
graft placement can correct the proximal alignment. An arthrodesis
of the first MTP joint may be indicated in patients with spasticity to
prevent recurrence.

CURLY TOES

Curly toes, or varus deformity, is caused by contracture of the flexor
digitorum longus resulting in flexion at the MTP and interphalangeal
(IP) joints and medial deviation of the toe. It is extremely common
and is often seen in the parents of affected patients. The toe usually lies
underneath its neighbor, and the third, fourth, and fifth toes are most
commonly involved (Fig. 715.12). The deformity very rarely causes
symptoms, and active treatment (stretching, splinting, or taping) is
not required. Most cases improve over time, and a subset will resolve
completely. For the rare case in which there is chronic pain or skin
irritation, release of the flexor digitorum longus tendon at the distal
IP joint may be considered. Osteotomy in the older child may rarely
be considered.

OVERLAPPING FIFTH TOE

Congenital digitus minimus varus, or varus fifth toe, involves dorsiflexion and adduction of the fifth toe. The fifth toe typically overlaps the fourth. There is also a rotatory deformity of the toe, and
the nail tends to point outward. Mild congenital shortness of the
fifth metatarsal is common. The deformity is usually bilateral and
may have a genetic basis. Symptoms are frequent and involve pain
over the dorsum of the toe from shoe wear. Nonoperative treatment
has not been successful. For symptomatic patients, several different
options for reconstruction have been described. Common features
of operative intervention include releasing the contracted extensor
tendon and the MTP joint capsule (dorsal, dorsomedial, or complete), and plastic alteration of the tight skin. An alternative procedure involves creation of a syndactyly between the fourth and fifth
toes.

POLYDACTYLY

A

B

Fig. 715.11 Juvenile hallux valgus (bunion). A, Clinical appearance of

the right foot of an 11-­yr-­old with hallux valgus. B, Radiograph shows an
intermetatarsal angle of 15 degrees. The hallux valgus angle measures
42 degrees. It is the angle formed by a line drawn along the axis of the
proximal phalanx and a second line drawn along the shaft of the first
metatarsal. (From Ricco AI. Disorders of the foot. In: Herring JA, ed.
Tachdjian’s Pediatric Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2022;
Fig. 19-111.)

4209

Polydactyly is the most common congenital toe deformity and is
seen in approximately 2 in every 1,000 births; it is bilateral in 50% of
cases. Polydactyly may be preaxial (great toe) or postaxial (fifth toe),
and occasionally one of the central toes is duplicated. Associated
anomalies are found in approximately 10% of postaxial and 20% of
preaxial polydactyly and may be present in over half of patients with
more rare forms of polydactyly. One third of patients will also have
polydactyly of the hand. Conditions that may be associated with
polydactyly include Ellis-­Van Creveld (chondroectodermal dysplasia), longitudinal deficiency of the tibia, and Down syndrome. The
extra digit may be either rudimentary or well formed, and plain
radiographs of the foot help define the anatomy and evaluate any
coexisting bony anomalies. Treatment is indicated for cosmesis
and to allow for fitting with standard shoes. This involves surgical
removal of the extra digit, and the procedure is generally performed
between 9 and 12 months of age. Rudimentary digits may be surgically excised earlier but should not be “tied off,” as this may leave
painful residual scars or bone masses. For surgical treatment, radiographic evaluation is critical to properly plan reconstruction for a
properly shaped and stable foot at maturity.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4210 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

A

B

Fig. 715.12 Curly third, fourth, and fifth toes. (From Ricco AI. Disor-

ders of the foot. In: Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s Pediatric Orthopaedics,
6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022. Fig. 19-133.)

SYNDACTYLY

Syndactyly involves webbing of the toes, which may be simple (soft tissue only) or complex (involving bone). The syndactyly may be incomplete or complete (extends to the tip of the toes), and the toenails may
be confluent. There is often a positive family history, and the third and
fourth toes are most frequently involved. Symptoms are extremely rare,
and cosmetic concerns are infrequent. Treatment is only required for a
subset of cases in which there is an associated polydactyly (Fig. 715.13).
Complex syndactyly may be seen in patients with Apert syndrome.

HAMMER TOE

A hammer toe is a flexion deformity of the lesser toes that involves the
proximal IP (PIP) joint. This deformity may be distinguished from a curly
toe by the absence of rotation. The second toe is most often involved, and
a painful callus may develop over the dorsum of the toe where it rubs on
the shoe or the tip of the toe which is directed against the sole of the shoe.
Nonoperative therapy is rarely successful, and surgery is recommended
for symptomatic cases. A release of the flexor tendons will suffice in most
cases. Some authors recommend a transfer of the flexor tendon to the
extensor tendon. For severe cases with significant rigidity, especially in
older patients, a partial or complete resection of the proximal phalanx
and a PIP joint fusion may be required.

MALLET TOE

Mallet toe involves a flexion contracture at the distal IP (DIP) joint
and results from congenital shortening of the flexor digitorum longus
tendon. Patients may develop a painful callus on the plantar surface
of the tuft or dorsal aspect of the DIP joint. As nonoperative therapy
is usually unsuccessful, surgery is required for patients with chronic
symptoms. For flexible deformities in younger children, stretching or
release of the flexor digitorum longus tendon is recommended. For
stiffer deformities in older patients, resection of the head of the middle
phalanx, or arthrodesis of the DIP joint, may be considered.

CLAW TOE

A claw toe deformity involves hyperextension at the MTP joint and flexion
at both the PIP and DIP joints, often associated with dorsal subluxation of
the MTP joint. This condition must be distinguished from hyperextension
of the MTP joint due to ground reaction where the stiff flexed toe in stance
pushes the MTP joint into hyperextension. If the MTP does hyperextend, this
is a claw toe. The majority are associated with an underlying neurologic
disorder and must be evaluated. The etiology is usually muscle imbalance,
and the extensor tendons are recruited to substitute for weakening of the
tibialis anterior muscle. If treatment is elected, surgery is required. Transfer
of the extensor digitorum (or hallucis) tendon to the metatarsal neck is
commonly performed along with a dorsal capsulotomy of the MTP joint
and fusion of the PIP joint (IP joint of the great toe).

ANNULAR BANDS

Bands of amniotic tissue associated with amniotic disruption syndrome (early amniotic rupture sequence, congenital constriction band

Fig. 715.13 Clinical picture of polysyndactyly involving the great toe.

syndrome, annular band syndrome) may become entwined along the
extremities, resulting in a spectrum of problems from in utero amputation (Fig. 715.14) to a constriction ring along a digit (Fig. 715.15; see
Chapter 100). These rings, if deep enough, may result in impairment of
arterial or venous blood flow as well as severe damage to the muscles,
tendons, and bone growth distal to the band. Even though concerns
regarding tissue viability are less common, swelling from impairment
in venous return is often an urgent problem. The treatment of annular
bands usually involves observation; however, circumferential release of
the band may be required emergently if arterial inflow is obstructed or
electively to relieve venous congestion. Physical therapy and bracing
may help prevent future contractures and deformities.

MACRODACTYLY

Macrodactyly represents an enlargement of the toes and may occur as
an isolated problem or in association with a variety of other conditions
such as Proteus syndrome (Fig. 715.16), neurofibromatosis, tuberous
sclerosis, and Klippel-­
Trenaunay-­
Weber syndrome. This condition
results from a deregulation of growth, and there is hyperplasia of one or
more of the underlying tissues (osseous, nervous, lymphatic, vascular,
fibrofatty). Macrodactyly of the toes may be seen in isolation (localized
gigantism) or with enlargement of the entire foot or leg. In addition to
cosmetic concerns, patients may have difficulty wearing standard shoes.
The initial treatment is observation, if possible. This is a difficult condition to treat surgically, and complications are frequent. For involvement
of a single toe, the best option may be a resection of the ray (including
the metatarsal). For greater degrees of involvement, debulking of the
various tissues is required. Often a growth arrest of the underlying osseous structures is performed. Stiffness and wound problems are common. The rate of recurrence is high, and more than one debulking may
be required. Patients may elect to have an amputation if the process
cannot be controlled by less extensive procedures. Leg length inequality
is common and must be looked for and treated if needed.

SUBUNGUAL EXOSTOSIS

A subungual exostosis is a benign bone mass that projects out from the
dorsal and medial surface of a distal toe phalanx, under the nail. The
etiology is unknown but may relate to minor, repetitive trauma. The
great toe is involved most often. Patients present with discomfort, and
the toenail may be deformed and elevated. The lesion may be demonstrated on plain radiographs and histologically involves normal bone
with a fibrocartilaginous cap. The treatment for symptomatic lesions is
excision, and the recurrence rate is approximately 10%.

INGROWN TOENAIL

Ingrown toenails are relatively common in infants and young children
and usually involve the medial and/or lateral border of the great toe.
Symptoms include chronic irritation and discomfort. Recurrent infection is seen in some cases. Parents should be instructed when cutting
toenails to cut straight across the distal aspect of the nail, rather than

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 715 u The Foot and Toes

4211

Table 715.2  Differential Diagnosis of Foot Pain
According to Age
AGE GROUP

DIAGNOSTIC CONSIDERATIONS

0-6 yr

Poorly fitting shoes
Fracture
Puncture wound
Foreign body
Osteomyelitis
Cellulitis
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Hair tourniquet
Dactylitis
Leukemia

6-12 yr

Poorly fitting shoes
Trauma (fracture, sprain)
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (enthesopathy)
Puncture wound
Sever disease (calcaneal apophysitis)
Accessory tarsal navicular bone
Hypermobile flatfoot
Tarsal coalition
Oncologic (Ewing sarcoma, leukemia)

12-18 yr

Poorly fitting shoes
Stress fracture
Trauma (fracture, sprain)
Foreign body
Ingrown toenail
Metatarsalgia
Plantar fasciitis
Achilles tendinopathy
Accessory ossicles (navicular, os trigonum)
Tarsal coalition
Avascular necrosis of metatarsal (Freiberg
infarction) or navicular (Köhler disease) bones
Plantar warts

Fig. 715.14 Constriction band syndrome with congenital amputation.

From Marcdante KJ, Kliegman RM, Schuh AM. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics, 9th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023.

Fig. 715.15 Constriction band syndrome with foot involvement.

715.11 Painful Foot
Christine M. Goodbody, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Richard S. Davidson
Table 715.2 shows a differential diagnosis for foot pain in different age
ranges. In addition to the history and physical examination, plain radiographs are most helpful in establishing the diagnosis. Occasionally more
sophisticated imaging modalities such as CT or MRI will be required.

715.12 Shoes
Christine M. Goodbody, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Richard S. Davidson

curve inward at the nail edges. If conservative measures, including shoe
modifications, warm soaks, and appropriate nail trimming fail to control the symptoms, surgical removal of a portion of the nail should be
considered.

In toddlers and children, a well-­fitting shoe with flexible soles is recommended. This recommendation is in part based on studies suggesting that the development of the longitudinal arch seems to be best in
societies in which shoes are not worn, and flatfeet are more common
in shod children. Well-­cushioned, shock-­absorbing shoes are helpful
in the child and adolescent athlete to decrease the chances of developing an overuse injury. Otherwise, shoe modifications are generally
reserved for abnormalities in either alignment between segments of the
foot or symptoms from an underlying condition (e.g., a limb-­length
discrepancy). Numerous modifications are available.
As a rule, shoes protect the foot from abnormal temperature as well
as rough surfaces and sharp objects but have not been shown to help
the normal foot develop. Poorly fitting shoes may create problems.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 715.16 Macrodactyly of the great toe in a case of Proteus syndrome.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4212 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

Chapter 716

Torsional and Angular
Deformities of the Limb
Brendan A. Williams, Jennifer J. Winell,
and Lawrence Wells
716.1 Normal Limb Development
Brendan A. Williams, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Lawrence Wells
During the seventh week of intrauterine life, the lower limb rotates
medially to bring the great toe toward the midline. The hip joint forms
by the eleventh week; the proximal femur and acetabulum continue to
develop until physeal closure in adolescence. The first component of
rotation is the femoral neck, which is rotated approximately 40 degrees
anteriorly at birth. This anterior rotation is referred to as anteversion
(the angle between the axis of the femoral neck and the transcondylar
axis). The increased anteversion results in increased internal rotation
of the hip. In most children, femoral anteversion decreases to 15-20
degrees by 8-10 years of age. Conditions such as cerebral palsy that
involve spasticity of the lower extremities can result in the persistence
of fetal anteversion. This results in torsional abnormalities of the lower
limb and gait disturbances. The second component of limb rotation is
found in the tibia. Tibial torsion is the angular difference between the
axis of the knee and the transmalleolar axis. Infants can have 30 degrees
of medial rotation of the tibia. When skeletally mature, the rotation is
between 5 degrees of medial rotation and 15 degrees of lateral rotation (Fig. 716.1). Excessive medial rotation of the tibia is referred to as
medial tibial torsion. This is very common and, although concerning
to parents, very rarely requires treatment. The medial or lateral rotation beyond ±2 SDs from the mean is considered abnormal rotation.
The third component of rotational (axial) abnormalities of the lower
extremity derives from the foot. Metatarsus adductus can cause the foot
to curve medially, pointing the toes inward. It is assessed by observing
the medial and lateral borders of the foot.
Torsional deformity may be simple, involving a single component, or
complex, involving multiple components. Complex deformities may be
additive (internal tibial torsion and internal femoral torsion are additive) or compensatory (external tibial torsion and internal femoral torsion are compensatory).
The normal tibiofemoral angle at birth is 10-15 degrees of physiologic varus. The alignment changes to 0 degrees by 18 months, and
physiologic valgus up to 12 degrees is reached in between 3 and 4 years
of age. The normal valgus of 7 degrees is achieved by 5-8 years of age
(Fig. 716.2). Persistence of varus beyond 2 years of age may be pathologic and is seen in conditions such as Blount disease. Overall, 95% of
developmental physiologic genu varum and genu valgum cases resolve
with growth. Persistent genu valgum or valgus into adolescence is considered pathologic and deserves further evaluation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

716.2 Limb Evaluation
Brendan A. Williams, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Lawrence Wells
When evaluating concerns regarding the limb, the provider should
obtain a history documenting onset, progression, functional limitations, previous treatment, evidence of neuromuscular disorder, and
any significant family history. The examination should assess the exact

torsional profile and include (1) foot progression angle, (2) femoral
anteversion, (3) tibial version with thigh-­foot angle, and (4) assessment
of foot adduction and abduction.

FOOT PROGRESSION ANGLE

Limb position during gait is expressed as the foot progression angle
and represents the angular difference between the axis of the foot with
the direction in which the child is walking. Its value is usually estimated by asking the child to walk in the clinic hallway (Fig. 716.3).
Inward rotation of the foot is assigned a negative value, and outward
rotation is designated with a positive value. The normal foot progression angle in children and adolescents is 10 degrees (range: −5 to 20
degrees). The foot progression angle delineates whether there is an in-­
toeing or out-­toeing gait.

FEMORAL ANTEVERSION

Hip rotation is measured with the child in the prone position, the hip
in neutral flexion or extension, thighs together, and the knees flexed
to 90 degrees (Fig. 716.4). Both hips are assessed at the same time.
Internal rotation of the hip is measured by rotating the leg ipsilaterally,
and external rotation is measured by rotating the leg contralaterally.
Excessive anteversion has increased internal rotation, whereas retroversion has increased external rotation. The amount of anteversion can
be approximately estimated by palpating the greater trochanter of the
hip while internally rotating the limb. Femoral anteversion should be
measured at the point when the greater trochanter is most prominent
laterally during this rotation (Craig test).

TIBIAL ROTATION

Tibial rotation is measured using the transmalleolar angle. The transmalleolar angle is the angle between the longitudinal axis of the thigh
with a line perpendicular to the axis of the medial and lateral malleolus
(Fig. 716.5). In the absence of foot deformity, the thigh-­foot angle is
preferred (Fig. 716.6). It is measured with the child lying prone. The
angle is formed between the longitudinal axis of the thigh and the longitudinal axis of the foot. It measures the tibial and hindfoot rotational status. Inward rotation is assigned a negative value, and outward rotation
is assigned a positive value. Inward rotation indicates medial tibial torsion, whereas outward rotation represents lateral tibial torsion. Infants
have a mean angle of −5 degrees (range: −35 to 40 degrees) as a consequence of normal in utero position. In mid-­childhood through adult
life, the mean thigh-­foot angle is 10 degrees (range: −5 to 30 degrees).

FOOT SHAPE AND POSITION

The foot is observed for any deformities in prone and standing position. The heel bisector line (HBL) is used to evaluate the foot adduction and abduction deformities. The HBL is a line that divides the heel
in two equal halves along the longitudinal axis (Fig. 716.7). It normally
extends through the center of the second toe. When the HBL points
medial to the second toe, the forefoot is abducted, and when the HBL
is lateral to the second toe, the forefoot is adducted. Other lower-­
extremity problems, such as heel varus or valgus, can make assessment
of axial plane issues more difficult.
It is also important to screen children with these foot deformities
for associated hip dysplasia and neuromuscular problems (e.g., cerebral palsy).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

716.3 Torsional Deformities
Brendan A. Williams, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Lawrence Wells

FEMORAL ANTEVERSION

In-­toeing gait most commonly results from excessive femoral anteversion. It occurs more commonly in females than males (2:1) in children
3-6 years of age and is congenital, resulting from persistent infantile

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 716 u Torsional and Angular Deformities of the Limb
Foot Progression Angle
FPA

Rotational Profile
R

4213

L

20

FPA

2 SD

10

MR
LR

2 SD

0

TFA
10

Foot

1

A

3

5

7

B

9 11 13 15-19
Age (years)

30’s 50’s 70

Medial Rotation
MR males

Medial Rotation
MR females
80

80

60

60
2 SD

40
20

2 SD

40
20

2 SD

0
1

3

5

7

9

C

11 13 15-19
Age (yr)

2 SD

0

30’s 50’s 70

1

3

5

7

9

D

Lateral Rotation
LR

11 13 15-19
Age (yr)

30’s 50’s 70

Thigh–Foot Angle
TFA

100

40

80

20

60
40

2 SD

0

2 SD

20

2 SD
2 SD

40

20
1

3

E

5

7

9

11 13 15-19
Age (yr)

30’s 50’s 70

1

F

3

5

7

9

11 13 15-19
Age (yr)

30’s 50’s 70

Fig. 716.1 A-­F, The rotational profile from birth to maturity is depicted graphically. All graphs include 2 SD from the mean for the foot progression
angle (FPA) for femoral medial rotation (MR) and lateral rotation (LR) (for males and females), and the thigh-­foot angle (TFA). (From Morrissey RT,
Weinstein SL, eds. Lovell and Winter’s Pediatric Orthopaedics, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1990.)

20°
15°

Varus 10°
5°
0°
5°

1 2 3 4

5 6 7

8 9 10 11 12 13

Valgus 10°
15°
20°

A

Age (yr)

B

Fig. 716.2 A, Development of the tibiofemoral angle during growth (after Salenius). B, Serial radiographs demonstrating normal transition from

varus alignment at 14 months to neutral position at 25 months to valgus tibiofemoral alignment at 39 months. (From Wimberly RL. Disorders of the
leg. In: Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s Pediatric Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig 18.13.)

anteversion. On examination, many children with this condition will
have generalized ligamentous laxity. Gait examination reveals that the
entire leg is inwardly rotated. Internal hip rotation is increased beyond
70 degrees, and consequently the external rotation is restricted to 10-20
degrees. Clinically, the patellae point inward when the foot is straight,
and compensatory external rotation of the tibia is demonstrated. This
is frequently mistaken as “genu valgum.” The amount of anteversion
can be roughly estimated by palpating the greater trochanter of the hip

while internally rotating the limb. The point of maximal prominence of
the greater trochanter laterally during this rotation corresponds to the
degree of femoral anteversion.
Diagnosis is made clinically on examination; CT can provide objective measurements but is rarely indicated. The treatment is predominantly observation and reassurance. The torsion usually corrects with
longitudinal growth by 8-10 years of age. Although rare, persistent
deformity, unacceptable cosmesis, functional impairment, anteversion

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4214 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

Fig. 716.3 Foot progression angle. The long axis of the foot is com-

pared with the direction in which the child is walking. If the long axis of
the foot is directed outward, the angle is positive. If the foot is directed
inward, the angle is negative and indicates in-­toeing. (From Thompson GH. Gait disturbances. In: Kliegman RM, ed. Practical Strategies
in Pediatric Diagnosis and Therapy. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2004.)

Fig. 716.5 Measurement of transmalleolar angle (TMA). (From Guler

O, Isyar M, Karataş D, et al. Investigating the relationship between internal tibial torsion and medial collateral ligament injury in patients undergoing knee arthroscopy due to tears in the posterior one third of the
medial meniscus. Knee. 2016;23[4]:655–658, Fig 2.)

A

malleolus, but by adulthood, it is reversed, with the tibia in 15 degrees
of external rotation. The treatment is observation and reassurance
because spontaneous resolution with normal growth and development
can be anticipated. Correction can be seen as early as 4 years of age and
in some children by 8-10 years of age. Persistent deformity with functional impairment is treated with supramalleolar derotation osteotomy,
but this is rarely necessary.

EXTERNAL FEMORAL TORSION

B
Fig. 716.4 Anteversion measured by medial rotation of hip (A) and

lateral rotation of hip (B). In this patient, internal rotation is nearly 90
degrees, suggestive of excessive femoral anteversion.

>45 degrees, and no external rotation beyond neutral are indications
for operative intervention. Surgery involves a derotation osteotomy of
the femur.

MEDIAL TIBIAL TORSION

Medial (internal) tibial torsion manifests with in-­toeing gait. It is
commonly associated with metatarsus adductus, genu valgum, or
femoral anteversion. This condition is usually seen during the second
year of life. It is often noticed after the child begins to walk independently. Many parents are concerned with a “bowed” appearance of the
legs. Normally at birth, the medial malleolus lies behind the lateral

Femoral retrotorsion, when of idiopathic origin, is usually bilateral.
The disorder is associated with an out-­toeing gait and increased incidence of degenerative arthritis. The clinical examination of external
femoral torsion shows excessive hip external rotation and limitation
of internal rotation. The hip will externally rotate up to 70-90 degrees
and internally rotate to only 0-20 degrees. External femoral torsion
can also follow a slipped capital femoral epiphysis (SCFE). There
should be a low threshold to perform radiographs of the hips in children older than 10 years of age who present with hip or knee pain
and decreased internal rotation of the hip on clinical examination.
If a SCFE is detected, it is treated surgically. Occasionally, persistent
femoral retroversion after SCFE can produce functional impairment resulting in a severe out-­toed gait and difficulty opposing one’s
knees in the sitting position. The latter can be disabling to adolescent females. Should this occur, a Southwick osteotomy or surgical
realignment might be necessary.

LATERAL TIBIAL TORSION

Lateral (external) tibial torsion is less common than medial rotation
and is often associated with a calcaneovalgus foot. It can be compensatory to persistent femoral anteversion or secondary to a tight iliotibial
band. Natural growth rotates the tibia externally, and therefore external
tibial torsion can become worse with time. Clinically, the patella faces
outward when the foot is straight. The thigh-­foot angle and the transmalleolar angle are increased. There may be associated patellofemoral
instability with knee pain. Although some correction can occur with
growth, extremely symptomatic children may need a supramalleolar
osteotomy, which is usually done by 10-12 years of age.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 716 u Torsional and Angular Deformities of the Limb

4215

Fig. 716.6 Thigh-­foot angle. With the child in the prone position and

the knees flexed and approximated, the long axis of the foot can be
compared with the long axis of the thigh. The long axis of the foot bisects the heel and the third or middle toe. A, External tibial torsion produces excessive outward rotation. B, Normal alignment is characterized
by slight external rotation. C, Internal tibial torsion produces inward
rotation. (From Zolkoske AC, Fehr SD. Gait disturbances. In: Kliegman
RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based
Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Fig 45.6.)

A

B

C

GENU VARUM

Physiologic bowleg is a common torsional combination that is secondary to normal in utero positioning (Fig. 716.8). Spontaneous resolution
with normal growth and development can be anticipated. Persistence
of varus beyond 2 years of age may be pathologic. Causes of pathologic bowing include metabolic bone disease (vitamin D deficiency,
rickets, hypophosphatasia), asymmetric growth arrest (trauma, infection, tumor, Blount disease), bone dysplasia (dwarfism, metaphyseal
dysplasia), and congenital and neuromuscular disorders (Table 716.1).
It is important to differentiate physiologic bowing from Blount disease
(Table 716.2). Physiologic bowing should also be differentiated from
rickets and skeletal dysplasia. Rickets has classic bony changes seen
on plain radiographs with trumpeting widening and fraying of the
metaphysis along with widening of the physis (see Chapter 69).

TIBIA VARA

NORMAL

Fig. 716.7 Schematic demonstration of heel bisector line.

METATARSUS ADDUCTUS

Metatarsus adductus (see Chapter 715.1) manifests with forefoot
adduction and medial rotation of all metatarsals. Of children with
metatarsus adductus, 10–15% have hip dysplasia. The prognosis is
good because the majority get better with nonoperative intervention.
Feet that correct actively with stimulation of the lateral border of the
foot are treated with stretching exercises alone. Feet that are flexible
and correctable to neutral with manipulation are treated with stretching, reverse last shoes, or serial casting. Feet that do not correct fully
with conservative care or rigid deformities are treated with medial capsulotomy of the first metatarsal cuneiform joint and soft tissue release
by 2 years of age. Osteotomies of the base of the metatarsal may be
performed after 6 years of age.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

716.4 Coronal Plane Deformities
Brendan A. Williams, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Lawrence Wells
Genu varum and genu valgum are common pediatric deformities of
the knee. Figure 716.2 presents the age-­appropriate normal values for
knee angle. Tibial bowing is common during the first year, bowlegs are
common during the second year, and knock-­knees are most prominent
between 3 and 4 years of age.

Idiopathic tibia vara, or Blount disease, is a developmental deformity resulting from abnormal endochondral ossification of the medial
aspect of the proximal tibial physis leading to varus angulation and
medial rotation of the tibia (Fig. 716.9). The incidence is greater in
Black patients and in overweight toddlers. It is also higher in patients
who have an affected family member or started walking early in life.
Idiopathic tibia vara has been classified into three types, depending
on the age at onset: infantile (1-3 years of age), juvenile (4-10 years of
age), and adolescent (11 years or older). The juvenile and adolescent
forms are commonly combined as late-­onset tibia vara. The exact cause
of tibia vara remains unknown, although it is thought to result from
abnormal growth of the physis due to excessive weight.
The infantile form of tibia vara is the most common. There is a predominance in Black females. Approximately 80% are bilateral with a
prominent medial metaphyseal beak, internal tibial torsion, and leg-­
length discrepancy. The characteristics of the juvenile and adolescent (late-­onset) forms include predominance in Black males, obesity,
normal or greater than normal height, less frequent bilateral involvement (approximately 50%), slowly progressive genu varum deformity,
pain rather than deformity as the primary initial complaint, no palpable proximal medial metaphyseal beak, minimal internal tibial torsion, mild medial collateral ligament laxity, and mild lower extremity
length discrepancy. The infantile group has the greatest potential for
progression.
An anteroposterior (AP) standing radiograph of both lower extremities with patellae facing forward and a lateral radiograph of the
involved extremity should be obtained (Fig. 716.10). Weight-­bearing
radiographs are preferred and allow maximal presentation of the clinical deformity. The metaphyseal-­diaphyseal angle (Drennan angle) can
be measured and is useful in distinguishing between physiologic genu
varum and early tibia vara (Fig. 716.11). This angle can aid in predicting the risk of progression. Angles greater than 16 degrees carry an
increased risk of progression, whereas those less than 10 degrees are
likely to resolve spontaneously. Patients with Drennan angles of 11-16
degrees should be monitored for progressive tibia vara.
The Langenskiöld classification, which describes six stages on radiographs for infantile Blount disease (Fig. 716.12), is the most widely

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4216 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
cited classification system, although other radiographic and MRI-­based
systems have been described. Langenskiöld differentiates based on
fragmentation of the epiphysis, beaking of the medial tibial epiphysis,
depression of the medial tibial plateau, and formation of a bony bar. CT
with three-­dimensional reconstructions and MRI can also be useful to
assess the meniscus; the articular surface of the proximal tibia, including
the posteromedial slope; or the integrity of the proximal tibial physis.
Management is based on the stage of the disease, the age of the child,
and the nature of presentation (primary or recurrent deformity). In children younger than 3 years and Langenskiöld stage <3, bracing is effective and can prevent progression in 50% of patients. A maximal trial of
1 year of orthotic management is recommended. If complete correction
is not obtained after 1 year or if progression occurs during this time, a
corrective osteotomy is indicated. Surgical treatment is also indicated in
children >4 years of age, those at Langenskiöld stage >3, and those with
severe deformities. A proximal tibial valgus osteotomy and associated
fibular diaphyseal osteotomy are usually the procedures of choice. In late-­
onset tibia vara, correction is also necessary to restore the mechanical
axis of the knee. Hemiplateau elevation with correction of posteromedial
slope has been established as a treatment modality in relapsed cases.

GENU VALGUM (KNOCK-­KNEES)
B

A

Fig. 716.8 Genu varum. A, In recumbent position, tibia and femora

are bowed, but the legs do not appear bowed. B, In erect position during weight bearing and with ankles in apposition, the legs are bowed.
(From Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019.)

Table 716.1  Classification of Genu Varum (Bowlegs)
PHYSIOLOGIC
Asymmetric growth
Tibia vara (Blount disease)
• Infantile
• Juvenile
• Adolescent
Focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia
Physeal injury
Trauma
Infection
Tumor

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

METABOLIC DISORDERS
Vitamin D deficiency (nutritional rickets)
Vitamin D–resistant rickets
Hypophosphatasia

716.5 Congenital Angular Deformities of
the Tibia and Fibula

SKELETAL DYSPLASIA
Metaphyseal dysplasia
Achondroplasia
Enchondromatosis

Brendan A. Williams, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Lawrence Wells

Modified from Thompson GH. Angular deformities of the lower extremities. In:
Chapman MW, ed. Operative Orthopedics, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott; 1993:
Table 222-1, p. 3132.

Table 716.2  Differentiation of Leg Bowing
PHYSIOLOGIC BOWING

The appearance of symmetric bilateral genu valgum most pronounced
around age 4 years of age is part of the normal physiologic process of
leg development. However, variation of up to 15 degrees of valgus is
possible until 6 years of age. The majority of physiologic valgus has a
good chance of correction until this age. The intermalleolar distance
with the knees approximated is normally <2 cm, and in a severe valgus deformity, it could measure >10 cm. Pathologic conditions leading
to valgus are metabolic bone disease (e.g., rickets or renal osteodystrophy), skeletal dysplasia, posttraumatic physeal arrest, tumors, and
infection. The increased valgus at the knee causes lateral deviation of
the mechanical axis with stretching of the medial aspect of the knee
leading to knee pain. Deformities >15 degrees and occurring after
6 years of age are unlikely to correct with growth and require surgical management. In the skeletally immature, medial tibial epiphyseal
hemiepiphysiodesis or stapling (guided growth) is attempted for correction. In the skeletally mature, osteotomy is necessary at the center of
rotation of angulation and is usually situated in the distal femur. Long-­
length AP radiographs of the leg in a weight-­bearing stance are necessary for preoperative planning.

BLOUNT DISEASE

Gentle and symmetric deformity

Asymmetric, abrupt, and sharp
angulation

Metaphyseal-­diaphyseal angle
<11 degrees

Metaphyseal-­diaphyseal angle
>11 degrees

Normal appearance of the
proximal tibial growth plate

Medial sloping of the epiphysis
Widening of the physis
Fragmentation of the metaphysis

No significant lateral thrust

Significant lateral thrust

POSTEROMEDIAL TIBIAL BOWING

Congenital posteromedial bowing is typically associated with a calcaneovalgus foot and rarely with secondary valgus of the tibia. The
exact cause is unknown. Early operative intervention is not indicated
because this bowing generally corrects with growth. However, despite
the correction of angulation, there can be residual shortening in the
tibia and fibula. The mean growth inhibition is 12–13% (range: 5–27%).
The mean leg length discrepancy at maturity is 4 cm (range: 3-7 cm).
The diagnosis of bowing is confirmed on radiographs, which show the
posteromedial angulation without any other osseous abnormalities.
The calcaneovalgus deformity of the foot improves with stretching or
modified shoe wear and occasionally ankle-­foot orthosis. Predicted leg
length discrepancy <4 cm is managed with age-­appropriate epiphysiodesis of the normal leg. Leg length discrepancy >4 cm is managed with
combination of contralateral epiphysiodesis and ipsilateral lengthening. A corrective osteotomy for distal valgus may be required and can
be done in the same setting while correcting leg length discrepancy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 716 u Torsional and Angular Deformities of the Limb

A

B

4217

C

Fig. 716.9 Blount disease in a 5-­year-­old child. A and B, Preoperative clinical appearance. Note the abrupt medial deviation of the tibia just be-

low the knee. Lateral “thrust” of the knee during weight bearing exacerbates the “limp.” C, Radiograph demonstrating abrupt angulation at the
epiphyseal-­metaphyseal junction and medial metaphyseal radiolucency and beaking with apparent lateral subluxation of the proximal end of the
tibia. (From Johnston CE, Young M. Disorders of the leg. In: Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s Pediatric Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022:
Fig 18.14.)

M-D angle

Fig. 716.11 Metaphyseal-­diaphyseal (M-­D) angle. Draw a line on the
Fig. 716.10 Anteroposterior radiograph of both knees in Blount disease.

ANTEROMEDIAL TIBIAL BOWING (POSTAXIAL
HEMIMELIA)

Fibular hemimelia is the most common cause of anteromedial bowing
of the tibia. The fibular deficiency can occur with complete absence of
fibula or with partial fibular development both proximally and distally.
It is associated with deformities of femur, knee, tibia, ankle, and foot.
The femur is short and has lateral condylar hypoplasia, causing patellar

radiograph through the proximal tibial physis. Draw another line along
the lateral tibial cortex. Last, draw a line perpendicular to the shaft line
as demonstrated in the diagram. (From Morrissey RT, Weinstein SL, eds.
Lovell and Winter’s Pediatric Orthopaedics, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1990.)

instability and genu valgum deformity. The tibia has anteromedial bowing
with reduced growth potential. The keys for management are addressing
the ankle stability and foot deformities. The ankle resembles a ball-­and-­
socket joint with lateral instability. The foot deformities are characterized
by the absence of lateral digits, equinocavovarus foot, and tarsal coalition.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4218 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

I

II

III

IV

V

VI

Fig. 716.12 Depiction of the stages of infantile Blount disease. (From Langeskiöld A. Tibia vara [osteochondrosis deformans tibiae]: a survey of
23 cases. Acta Chir Scand. 1952;103:1.)

1

1 AP

1

LAT

4

4A

2

AP

2A

AP

4A LAT

2A LAT

4B

AP

2B

AP

4B LAT

2B LAT

4C AP

3

3 AP

3

LAT

4C LAT

Fig. 716.13 Paley classification of congenital pseudoarthrosis of the tibia. Paley: type 1, no fractures; type 2, no fracture tibia, fracture fibula

with fibula (2A) at station (2B) proximal migration; type 3, fracture tibia, no fracture fibula; type 4, fracture tibia and fibula with fibula (4A) at station
(4B) proximal migration (4C) bone defect tibia with proximal migration fibula AP, Anteroposterior; LAT, lateral. (Reproduced with permission by the
Paley Foundation.) (From Paley D. Congenital pseudarthrosis of the tibia: biological and biomechanical considerations to achieve union and prevent
refracture. J Child Orthop. 2019;13:120–133.)

Various surgical options have been described, and the treatment is tailored to the patient’s needs and parents’ acceptance. A severely deformed
foot may be best managed with Syme or Boyd amputation and prosthesis
as early as 1 year of age. In the salvageable foot, leg length discrepancy
can be treated with contralateral leg epiphysiodesis or ipsilateral limb
lengthening.

ANTEROLATERAL TIBIAL BOWING

Anterolateral tibial bowing is associated with congenital pseudarthrosis
of the tibia (CPT). Previous estimates suggest that 50–60% of patients with
CPT have neurofibromatosis; however, this prevalence may be underestimated as the diagnostic criteria for neurofibromatosis often become evident after CPT has been diagnosed. Overall, less than 10% of patients with
neurofibromatosis have this lesion. The pseudarthrosis or site of nonunion
is typically situated at the middle third and distal third of the tibia. The
Boyd’s classification identifies six types of CPT with increasing severity
depending on the presence of cystic and dysplastic changes. The Paley classification is another frequently employed system (Fig. 716.13). The treatment for this condition has been very frustrating with poor results. Bracing
has been recommended to prevent fracture early in the course but does not
usually obviate need for later surgical intervention. Numerous treatment
protocols and surgical procedures have been described to achieve union,
such as single-­and dual-­onlay grafting with rigid internal fixation, intramedullary nailing with or without bone grafting, and circular frame fixation. With the growing use of microsurgery in orthopedics, vascularized

fibular autograft also has been used with varying results. Due to the rate
of complications occurring during reconstructive treatment, a below-­knee
amputation with early rehabilitation is also an accepted treatment strategy
for some of these patients.

TIBIAL LONGITUDINAL DEFICIENCY

Tibial longitudinal deficiency, or tibial hemimelia, follows an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. Multiple classification systems have
been described, all of which largely categorize patients based on which
portion(s) of the tibia is deficient. The other associated anomalies are
foot deformities, hip dysplasia, and symphalangism of the hand. Traditionally, treatment has been guided by the Jones classification, which
describes presence of a proximal tibial anlage and a functional quadriceps mechanism. In type Ia deformity, the proximal tibial anlage is
absent, and knee disarticulation with prosthesis is recommended. In
types Ib and II, the tibial anlage is present, and the management consists of an early Syme amputation, followed later by synostosis of the
fibula with the tibia, and a below-­knee prosthesis. Type III is rare, and
the principal management is with Syme amputation and a prosthesis.
Type IV deformity is associated with ankle diastasis, which requires
stabilization of the ankle and correction of leg length discrepancy at a
later stage. Due to the varied pathology of this condition and its rarity,
treatment options and recommendations continue to evolve.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 717 u Leg-­Length Discrepancy

Chapter 717

Leg-­Length Discrepancy
Christine M. Goodbody and
Richard S. Davidson
A discrepancy in leg lengths may result from a variety of congenital or
acquired conditions (Table 717.1). Although up to 25% of adults may
have a difference of more than 1 cm, only a small percentage have more
than a 2 cm difference, for which the main consequence is gait asymmetry. An increase in vertical pelvic motion is observed, and more energy
must be expended during ambulation. Although a small compensatory
lumbar curvature may develop, a small leg-­length discrepancy (<2 cm)
is unlikely to result in back pain, structural scoliosis, or degenerative
arthritis. There is some evidence to suggest that larger, long-­standing
discrepancies may be associated with hip or knee arthritis, structural
scoliosis, and spine degenerative changes. The goal of treatment is to
have a discrepancy of <2-2.5 cm at skeletal maturity, and several treatment methods are available to achieve this objective. Knowledge of
the underlying etiology, coupled with regular follow-­up to assess limb
growth and skeletal maturity, allows the treating physician to project
the discrepancy at skeletal maturity and to plan treatment. A subset of
patients will have coexisting abnormalities in the viscera or musculoskeletal system that must also be identified and treated.

DIAGNOSIS AND CLINICAL FINDINGS

Gait asymmetry is the most frequent complaint. The long leg is often
kept flexed at the knee and hip in stance to level the pelvis. The diagnosis is made on physical examination, and specialized radiographs
help to quantify the existing discrepancy and predict what the discrepancy will be at maturity. The discrepancy may be caused by hypoplasia,
hyperplasia, or angular deformity (structural discrepancy), by soft-­
tissue contracture at the hips, knees, or ankles (apparent or functional
shortening), or by a combination of these conditions. Other contributing factors include joint subluxation or dislocation (hip), a decrease
in the height of the foot (congenital or neuromuscular), or structural
disorders of the pelvis. A careful physical examination is required to
identify all factors contributing to the discrepancy. Muscle contracture
about the hip will also create the appearance of leg-­length inequality.
For example, to bear weight on an abducted hip, the patient must hike
up the contralateral hip and pelvis, making the contralateral leg appear
short.
There are several clinical methods for measuring the extent of the
limb-­length discrepancy. The preferred method is to perform a standing examination in which blocks of various sizes are placed under the
short leg until the pelvis is leveled (Fig. 717.1). An alternate method is
to measure the length of each leg with the patient supine; the examiner
first extends the patient’s legs and examines the soles of the feet for
asymmetry before flexing the patient’s hip to 90 degrees to evaluate for
discrepant knee height (Galeazzi sign). Using a tape measure is very
inaccurate because of several variables, including the line of measurement used, muscle atrophy, and moving patients. The range of motion
at the hip, knee, and ankle must also be assessed to identify any causes
of apparent discrepancy. A 10-­degree fixed abduction (or adduction)
contracture of the hip may create an apparent leg-­length discrepancy
of 2-3 cm. Similarly, a flexion contracture of the hip and/or knee will
create apparent shortening of the extremity, whereas an equinus contracture at the ankle will create apparent lengthening of the extremity. A rigid lumbar scoliosis (suprapelvic contracture) will create pelvic
obliquity and an associated apparent limb length inequality. Once a
discrepancy is quantified in a child, it must be followed at regular intervals until maturity. Assessments at 6-­to 12-­month intervals are most
common depending on the rate of change.

4219

Leg-­length discrepancy may be associated with various genetic
overgrowth syndromes (see Table 717.1). If there are features other
than leg-­length discrepancy, specific diagnostic tests for Beckwith-­
Wiedemann syndrome and PIK3CA pathogenic variants must be
included in the patient’s evaluation. In these disorders, the leg overgrowth tends to increase over time.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION

Radiologic evaluation complements the clinical examination; both
are typically used when making treatment decisions. For an accurate
assessment, it is important that the child not move and keep their legs
extended; a lift may help. Five different techniques are available. The
teleoroentgenogram is a single radiographic exposure of both lower
extremities (standing) and requires a long cassette. A ruler is placed on
the film, and direct measurements are made, factoring in a 6% magnification error, which is usually accounted for using a radiographic
marker of known diameter to calibrate the image. One advantage is
that angular deformities may be assessed. Its primary indication is for
young children. Unfortunately, because only one exposure is used for
the leg and because the ankle is less dense than the hip, it may be difficult to “see” the whole leg. In addition, because the x-­ray source is at
the knee projecting up to the hip and down to the ankle, this method
projects the hip and ankle along the ruler, making the leg appear longer
than it really is, particularly in obese patients. The orthoroentgenogram consists of three separate exposures of the hips, knees, and ankles
on a long cassette. The patient is supine, and a ruler is placed on the
cassette for measurement of bone length. However, the patient must
lie still for the three exposures, which is often difficult to achieve in
younger children. Because the x-­ray beam is pointed at the hip, knee,
and ankle in each of the three exposures, the length measurement is
accurate and each of the three joints can be exposed properly. The
x-­rays expose from the top of the pelvis to the mid femur, from the
mid femur to the mid tibia, and from the mid tibia to below the foot for
each of the three exposures, respectively, permitting angular deformity
assessment in the frontal plane only. The scanogram also consists of
separate exposures of the hips, knees, and ankles on a cassette with a
radiographic ruler; a chest-­sized film cassette is used (Fig. 717.2). There
is no magnification error; patients must remain still for the three exposures, and angular deformities cannot be assessed. Although CT is an
accurate technique, the assessment is time-­consuming, and the patient
receives a larger dose of radiation. In addition, a radiologist must normalize the axis of the leg to the screen to accurately measure the limbs.
An advantage of CT is that limb and segment lengths can be measured
even if there are soft tissue contractures or deformity in the sagittal
plane. Another popular technique is called EOS. EOS is a proprietary
low-­dose x-­ray scanner that can simultaneously take orthogonal full-­
body images in a standing position and is therefore able to reconstruct
three-­dimensional (3D) images of the bony anatomy in question (Fig.
717.3). The advantages of EOS are that it has a much lower radiation
dose than standard x-­rays, it can capture frontal and sagittal planes
quickly and simultaneously, and there is no magnification error. The
disadvantages are that it requires a trained radiology technician to correctly align the limbs for computer measurement, and not all centers
have access to the technology at this time. Regardless of the technique,
it is critical that the patellae be pointed forward, that measurements
be made in the plane of the limb, that the legs be extended, and that
the same method be used in sequential measurements to be compared.
In the presence of flexion or extension deformities where 3D imaging is not employed, each bone should be x-­rayed individually with a
ruler where the x-­ray beam is perpendicular to the bone and the ruler
parallel to the bone.
In addition to quantifying the discrepancy, it is essential to determine skeletal age (bone age) to assess how much growth a patient has
left and to assist in estimating the size of discrepancy at maturity. An
anteroposterior radiograph of the hand and wrist is usually obtained at
each visit and compared with the standards in the Greulich and Pyle
Atlas to estimate skeletal age. Although more accurate techniques are
available, most are time-­consuming and impractical for routine clinical

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4220 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 717.1  Causes of Lower Extremity Length Discrepancy
SHORTENING

LENGTHENING

SHORTENING

CONGENITAL
Hemiatrophy*
Skeletal dysplasias
Short femur
Proximal focal femoral deficiency*
Fibular, tibial hemimelia
Developmental dysplasia of the
hip*

CONGENITAL
Hemihypertrophy*
Local vascular malformation

NEUROMUSCULAR DISEASE
Poliomyelitis
Cerebral palsy*
Myelomeningocele
Peripheral neuropathy
Focal cerebral lesions (hemiplegia)

TUMOR
Developmental
Neurofibromatosis
Multiple exostosis
Enchondromatosis (Ollier disease)
Osteochondromatosis
Fibrous dysplasia (Albright
syndrome)
Punctate epiphyseal dysplasia
Dysplasia epiphysealis hemimelica
(Trevor disease)
Radiation therapy before skeletal
maturity (physeal arrest)*
Resection of benign or malignant
neoplasm

TUMOR
Developmental
Neurofibromatosis
Soft tissue hemangioma
Arteriovenous malformation
Hemihypertrophy with Wilms
tumor
Aneurysm

INFECTION
Osteomyelitis*
Septic arthritis
Tuberculosis

INFECTION
Inflammation
Metaphyseal osteomyelitis
Rheumatoid arthritis
Hemarthrosis (hemophilia)

TRAUMA
Physeal injury*
Failed joint replacement
Osteotomy, atrophic nonunion
Overlapping, malposition of
fracture fragments*
Burns

TRAUMA
Metaphyseal, diaphyseal fracture
Diaphyseal operations (bone
grafts, osteosynthesis, periosteal
stripping)

OTHER
Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease*
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis

LENGTHENING

LATERALIZED OVERGROWTH
(HEMIHYPERTROPHY /
HEMIHYPERPLASIA
SYNDROMES)
Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome
PIK3CA related overgrowth
spectrum (PROS)
Klippel-­Trenaunay syndrome
CLOVES (congenital lipomatous
overgrowth, vascular
malformations, epidermal nevi,
scoliosis/skeletal, spinal)
Isolated lymphatic malformation
Fibroadipose vascular anomaly
Megalencephaly—capillary
malformation
Hemimegalencephaly /dysplastic
megalencephaly/focal cortical
dysplasia
Muscular hemihyperplasia
Fibroadipose hyperplasia or
overgrowth
CLAPO syndrome (capillary
malformation of lower lip,
lymphatic malformation of face
and neck, asymmetry of face and
limbs and partial or generalized
overgrowth)

*Common.
Modified from Moseley C. Leg-­length discrepancy. Pediatr Clin North Am. 1986;33(6):1385.

application. The range of variability using the atlas is approximately
9 months, so the method is most accurate when multiple data points
have been collected. Apps to calculate the discrepancy at maturity and
timing of treatment are available.

TREATMENT

Options for treatment include observation, a shoe lift or custom orthosis, a limb-­shortening procedure (acute shortening and internal fixation versus gradual shortening by growth arrest or guided growth),
a limb-­lengthening procedure (with internal or external fixation), or
a combination of these. Deformity correction is often accomplished
simultaneously. In the congenital deficiencies (femur, tibia, fibula) in
which the predicted limb-­length inequality will require more than
three lengthening operations (more than 20 cm), an early foot amputation may be the best option to achieve an optimal functional outcome.
In addition to the magnitude of discrepancy predicted at skeletal maturity, both the anticipated adult height of the patient (estimated from
family members) and the desires of the patient and the patient’s family
are important considerations.
Discrepancies of up to 2.5 cm may be treated by observation or a
shoe lift. With regard to a shoe lift, up to 1 cm may be placed within the
shoe, and up to 5 cm may be placed on the outside of the shoe. Complete correction of inequality is not required, and the height of the lift
should be adjusted based on the patient’s gait and comfort. An orthotic
may be used as a temporizing measure before definitive treatment.
For extended discrepancies, “foot in foot” extension prostheses are a

reasonable alternative until limb lengthening can be accomplished or
for patients who cannot or do not wish to undergo surgical correction.
For patients with a predicted ultimate discrepancy between 2 and­
5 cm, an epiphysiodesis is offered in skeletally immature patients, and
an acute shortening may be performed in a skeletally mature patient.
Epiphysiodesis refers to a temporary or permanent cessation of growth
at one or more physes. A permanent growth arrest is most commonly
performed when sufficient data are available with which to accurately
predict when to perform the procedure. Approximately 65% of the
growth of the lower extremity comes from the distal femur (37%, 9
mm/year) and proximal tibia (28%, 6 mm/year). Males typically grow
until 16 years of age, whereas females grow until 14 years of age. As
such, performing an epiphysiodesis of both the distal femur and the
proximal tibia in a patient with 3 years of growth remaining should
achieve approximately 4.5 cm of correction. Techniques used to determine the timing of epiphysiodesis are the Menelaus method (“rule of
thumb”), the Green and Anderson method, the Moseley straight-­line
graph, and the multiplier method (Figs. 717.4-717.6). Apps to make
calculations are available. The most common surgical technique for
permanent growth arrest is the percutaneous epiphysiodesis, in which
the physis is ablated with a drill and curetted under image intensification. This is an outpatient procedure with few complications. Insertion
of plates and screws or just screws across the physis is an alternative
but usually requires a second operation to remove the hardware. For
patients for whom sufficient data are unavailable or those for whom
the underlying diagnosis is associated with an unpredictable pattern

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 717 u Leg-­Length Discrepancy

A

4221

B

Fig. 717.1 Clinical assessment of limb length inequality with the aid

of graduated blocks. (A) True leg length inequality (or fixed functional discrepancy) results in asymmetric iliac crest or posterior iliac spine
heights with the patient standing erect. The examiner must be sure that
the patient is standing evenly on the legs, with the knees straight and
the feet flat on the floor. (B) A reasonably accurate estimation of leg
length inequality can be made by having the patient stand erect on sufficient graduated blocks under the shorter limb to level the pelvis. (From
Podeszwa D. Limb length discrepancy. In: Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s
Pediatric Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2022: Fig 20.3.)

Fig. 717.3 2D Biplanar Whole Body EOS Imaging. (From Garg B,

Mehta N, Bansal T, Malhotra R. EOS Imaging: concept and current applications in spinal disorders. J Clin Orthop Trauma. 2020;11:786–793.
Fig. 2.)

Fig. 717.2 Scanogram to demonstrate exact leg-­length discrepancy.

of growth, then a reversible technique, such as staples, plates, and/
or screws, may be considered. Once equalization has been achieved,
the hardware can be removed, allowing growth to resume. When the
patient is skeletally mature or if it is deemed appropriate to wait until
maturity before treatment, depending on the magnitude of deformity
and patient/family preference, acute shortening may be the best option.
Acute shortening is typically performed at the femur (several techniques have been described), given the increased risk of complications
associated with shortening of the tibia and fibula including compartment syndrome and neurovascular problems.
For discrepancies >5 cm after maturity, or for smaller ones
depending on patient/family preference, lengthening of the short
limb is the procedure of choice. An exception would be a discrepancy secondary to overgrowth of one limb, in which acute or gradual shortening of the abnormal limb would be preferred so as to
preserve body proportions. Patients with anticipated discrepancies
>8-10 cm often require one or more limb-­lengthening procedures
(several years apart), with or without an epiphysiodesis to mitigate
the size of the ultimate discrepancy and need for more than one
lengthening. The most common technique used for limb lengthening involves placement of an intramedullary magnetic lengthening
nail or an external fixator, either a ring fixator such as the Ilizarov
device or a monolateral device (Fig. 717.7). The bone is cut at the
metaphyseal-­
diaphyseal junction, and lengthening is achieved
gradually through distraction at the corticotomy. The usual rate

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4222 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Means and standard deviations derived from
longitudinal series 50 females and 50 males
MALES

Key

9

Means
Means ± 1
Means ± 2

8
7

Distal femur

6

5
4

5
4

3

6

3

5

2

5

2

1

4

0

3

4
3
2

2

1
0

Proximal tibia

6

Proximal tibia

Length (cm)

Distal femur

6

Length (cm)

FEMALES

1
0

1
7

8

9

A

10

11

12

13

14

0

15 16

9

10

11

B

Skeletal age (years)

12

13

14

15

16

17 18

Skeletal age (years)

Fig. 717.4 Growth remaining charts
for the distal femur and proximal tibia
for females (A) and males (B). These
charts are based on the growth data
and an estimate of the contribution to
growth of the distal femur (70%) and
the proximal tibia (56%) to the total
length of the respective bone. Data
are presented relative to skeletal age
from age 8 yr to skeletal maturity. (From
Podeszwa D. Limb length discrepancy.
In: ­Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s Pediatric ­Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia:
­Elsevier, 2022: Fig 20.13.)

Multiplier for Males and Females
(Paley et al, 1999)
Males

100

LLD Prediction
Formulas

Females
Multiplier

M

at

ur

ity

Age Multiplier Age
Mean

80

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

90

80

11 12 1314

Skeletal age - Females

Reference slopes

70
al

t

im

ox

Pr

70

a
ibi

ur

m
l fe

sta
h
Bot

Di

60

Straight line graph
for
leg length discrepancies

50

Lo

ng

le

g

50

60

Skeletal age - Males
3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14 15 16

40

0
0.4
1
1.3
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18

5.08
4.01
3.24
2.99
2.59
2.23
2.00
1.83
1.68
1.57
1.47
1.38
1.31
1.24
1.18
1.12
1.07
1.03
1.01
1.00
1.00

0
0.3
1
2
3
3.3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16

4.63
4.01
2.97
2.39
2.05
2.00
1.83
1.66
1.53
1.43
1.33
1.26
1.19
1.13
1.07
1.03
1.00
1.00
1.00

Prenatal LLD (congenital)
∆m  ∆  M
Postnatal LLD (developmental)
∆m  ∆  I  G
•

Inhibition ≈ I  1  S  S•
LL
Growth remaining  G  L(M  1)
∆m  LLD at maturity
∆  Current LLD
L & S  Current length of long and
short leg
L• & S•  Length of long and short
leg at any other date since
LLD began

M

at
ur

ity

Fig. 717.6 Paley multiplier. This is a simple method of determining

30

the leg-­length discrepancy (LLD) at maturation. This is applicable for
shortening conditions in which growth retardation is consistent. (From
Paley D, Bhave A, Herzenberg JE, et al. Multiplier methods for predicting limb-­length discrepancy. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2000;82;1432–
1446.)

Mean

Fig. 717.5 The Moseley straight-­line graph for the assessment of

leg-­length inequalities. This allows simultaneous correlation of the normal leg, short leg, and bone age of the child. It will accurately predict
lengths of each extremity at skeletal maturity. The reference slopes are
used as a guide in determining when appropriate treatment should be
performed. (From Moseley CF. A straight-­line graph for leg-­length discrepancies. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1977;59:174–179.)

of lengthening is 1 mm/day in the femur and 0.75 mm/day in the
tibia, and it takes approximately 1 month of wearing the fixator for
each centimeter of length gained with a minimum of 3 months in
the fixator. Additional time in the fixation device may be required
for pathologic bone or for metabolic diseases affecting bone formation. A maximum of 15–25% of the original length of the bone
may be gained at each session and is limited by tolerance of the
soft tissues and nearby neurovascular structures. An advantage of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 717 u Leg-­Length Discrepancy

4223

Fig. 717.7 Ilizarov device demonstrating bone lengthening by dis-

Fig. 717.9 Anteroposterior radiograph of fibular hemimelia with leg-­

A

the circular fixator or multiaxial external fixators is the ability to
correct coexisting angular deformities at the same time. Technologic advances have allowed the development of totally implantable
intramedullary lengthening rods driven by external magnets. Internal lengthening has become the procedure of choice for patients
whose age and anatomy are appropriate for the procedure, especially in the femur where external fixation is more poorly tolerated.
These devices may provide improvements in patient satisfaction
and reduced complications, including a lower rate of contracture
and absence of pin site infection. New technologies for internal
lengthening in skeletally immature patients whose physes cannot
safely be violated by a rigid nail are actively under study. Complications of limb lengthening include pin tract infection (most common), wound infection, hypertension, joint subluxation, muscle
contracture, stretch-­
induced nerve palsy, premature consolidation, delayed union, implant-­related problems, and fractures after
implant removal.
Early amputation and prosthetic fitting may provide the best long-­
term function in patients with projected discrepancies in excess of
18-20 cm, especially when there are coexisting deformities or deficiencies of the ipsilateral foot (Figs. 717.8 and 717.9). The alternative would
be multiple reconstructive procedures throughout childhood and adolescence. The cultural and personal values of the child and family, as
well as the impact of multiple procedures on the child’s psychosocial
development, must also be kept in mind when formulating the treatment plan in these complex cases.

traction osteogenesis.

B

Fig. 717.8 Extension prosthesis leg-­length discrepancy (A) and compensated with extension prosthesis (B).

length discrepancy.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4224 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

The knee is a synovial joint and forms between the third and fourth
months of fetal development. Secondary ossification centers form
between the sixth and ninth fetal months at the distal femur and
between the eighth fetal month and the first postnatal month at the
proximal tibia. The patellar ossification center does not appear until 2-4
years of age in females and 3-5 years of age in males.

discoid meniscus, it is the type most commonly associated with the
knee snapping characteristic of DLM. A type II, or incomplete discoid lateral meniscus, is of variable size and covers a lower percentage of the tibial surface (see Fig. 718.1C) compared to the complete
type. Although the meniscus can become stretched or torn over time,
both the complete and the incomplete types are thought to develop
with normal peripheral attachments. A type III, or Wrisberg variant
lateral meniscus, has no peripheral attachments posteriorly. Instead, it
is stabilized posteriorly only by a prominent meniscofemoral ligament,
or ligament of Wrisberg, that secures the posterior horn of the lateral
meniscus to the lateral surface of the medial femoral condyle (see Fig.
718.1D). As a result, the Wrisberg ligament type of DLM is extremely
mobile. Although its shape is not necessarily discoid, the hypermobility of the posterior portion of the meniscus allows it to be extruded
anteriorly with flexion and for it to pop back into place with extension,
allowing it to present with the same snapping knee pain characteristic
of the other DLM variants.

ANATOMY AND RANGE OF MOTION

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS

Chapter 718

The Knee
Anne M. Coyle and J. Todd R. Lawrence
NORMAL DEVELOPMENT OF THE KNEE

The knee is the largest joint in the body and acts primarily as a modified hinge. The distal femur is cam shaped, with the medial and lateral femoral condyles having slightly different shapes. The shape of the
articular surfaces allows the femur to glide posteriorly on the tibial plateau during knee flexion and also permits approximately 8-12 degrees
of rotation through the flexion and extension arc. The normal range of
motion of the knee is from neutral (or fully straight) to 140 degrees of
flexion. Increased ligament laxity, including hyperextension of up to
10-15 degrees, can be normal in many children. Most activities can be
performed in the flexion arc of 0-70 degrees.
The knee consists of three articulations: patellofemoral, tibiofemoral,
and tibiofibular. The anterior and posterior cruciate ligaments as well as
medial and lateral collateral ligaments stabilize the knee during movement. The medial and lateral menisci provide support under compressive forces, helping to redistribute the forces from the more rounded
distal femur to the flatter proximal tibia. The medial patellofemoral
ligament is the primary static soft tissue restraint against lateral patellar
displacement. There are also several bursae located about the knee to
cushion and reduce friction on tendons acting across the knee joint.

718.1 Discoid Lateral Meniscus
Anne M. Coyle and J. Todd R. Lawrence
Discoid lateral meniscus (DLM) is a congenital anatomic variation
of the lateral meniscus that may be asymptomatic or cause the classic snapping knee syndrome. Many cases are asymptomatic for years,
making the true incidence difficult to determine. DLM is estimated to
occur in 3–5% of children and adolescents and is bilateral in about 20%
of cases.
Anatomically, the normal meniscus (Fig. 718.1A) is attached around
its periphery and at the tips of the “C” anteriorly and posteriorly onto
the tibia. During knee motion, the meniscus translates anteriorly and
posteriorly to match the slight rollback of the lateral femoral condyle
on the tibia with knee flexion. However, with DLM, the meniscal tissue
trapped between the articular surfaces is pushed anteriorly as the knee
flexes. These abnormal forces, over time, result in tears in the meniscal
tissue, the peripheral attachments, or both. Tearing or stretching of this
tissue allows for excessive meniscal displacement during knee range of
motion. Usually a pop is heard or sensed when flexing at about 90-120
degrees of knee flexion as the meniscus is extruded anteriorly and a
loud click or clunk is heard when extending the knee in the last 30
degrees of extension as the meniscus reduces back between the joint
surfaces.
The Watanabe classification system defines three types of DLM
based on arthroscopic appearance. A type I, or complete discoid lateral meniscus, is characterized by a thickened lateral meniscus with
complete coverage of the tibial surface (see Fig. 718.1B). Because
meniscus tissue is always between the joint surfaces with this type of

All types of DLM can be asymptomatic, especially if they have stable
peripheral attachments and no tears (see Fig. 718.1). Patients with
symptomatic DLM usually present with complaints of lateral knee pain
and examination findings consistent with a meniscal tear or meniscal instability because of absent peripheral attachments, allowing for
anterior extrusion during flexion and reduction with extension thus
producing the classic snapping knee. Although patients can present as
early as 2 years of age, presentation after 6 years of age is typical, with
the highest incidence of presentation during the teenage years.
Younger children usually present with no history of trauma or acute
inciting event but rather with a complaint of popping in the knee with
occasional swelling as a result of peripheral tears or instability of the
meniscus. Older children and adolescents often can recall an inciting
event and will sometimes report a history of the mechanical popping.
However, they more often note lateral joint line pain and knee swelling.
Weight gain during the adolescent growth spurt places increased static
and dynamic loads on the tissue, especially during high-­level sports.
In these patients, degeneration in the central portion of the DLM with
direct weight-­bearing makes the meniscus highly susceptible to injury
and tears, producing the lateral pain and swelling in the knee. Often,
the classic popping is not appreciated in these patients.
Physical examination often shows a mild effusion and tenderness
over the lateral joint line. For patients with an unstable meniscus, when
the knee is fully flexed, a pop with a slight protuberance along the lateral joint line anteriorly can sometimes be appreciated as the meniscus
is extruded anteriorly. When the knee is brought back into extension at
approximately 20-30 degrees short of full extension, the meniscus can
be felt to snap back in place and the protuberance at the lateral joint
line disappears.
A high level of suspicion is necessary based on history and clinical examination findings because many patients will present with a
complaint that their knee is “dislocating.” Radiographs including standard anteroposterior (AP), lateral, merchant (patellar), and 45 degrees
flexed posteroanterior (PA) (tunnel) views should be obtained if this
diagnosis is considered. Radiographs may appear normal or show
findings that include widening of the lateral aspect of the knee joint,
flattening of the lateral femoral condyle (resulting in a squared-­off
appearance), lateral tibial spine hypoplasia, and cupping of the lateral
aspect of the tibial plateau. Because these findings are very nonspecific,
with any history or physical examination findings suggestive of DLM,
evaluation using MRI will provide a definitive diagnosis. Diagnosis on
MRI is made if the ratio of the minimal meniscal width to the maximal
tibial width in the coronal plane is >20% and/or if continuity between
the anterior and posterior horns of the meniscus is present on three or
more consecutive slices in the sagittal plane.

TREATMENT

Patients with asymptomatic or incidentally found DLM without evidence of a tear or meniscal instability do not require treatment. They
should be educated on symptoms to anticipate, but activity restriction

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 718 u The Knee

A

B

C

4225

D

Fig. 718.1 The anatomy of the normal meniscus and discoid variants. A, The lateral meniscus normally has a C shape with circumferential and

root attachments. B, A type I, or complete, discoid lateral meniscus covers the entire tibial plateau and has normal attachments. C, A type II, or
incomplete, discoid lateral meniscus partially covers the tibial plateau and also has normal attachments. D, A type III, or Wrisberg ligament type,
appears similar in shape to a normal lateral meniscus but lacks sufficient attachments posteriorly resulting in a hypermobile meniscus. The ligament
of Wrisberg secures the posterior horn of the meniscus to the lateral aspect of the medial femoral condyle.

is not usually necessary. If knee pain or mechanical symptoms are persistent and limit activity or if a meniscal tear develops, surgical intervention should be considered. Partial meniscectomy, referred to as
saucerization, is often performed to reshape the meniscus arthroscopically with the goal of obtaining an anatomically normal-­appearing
meniscus (Fig. 718.2). Tears remaining in what would be the normal
rim of meniscal tissue are either repaired or excised. Meniscal instability is also addressed with repairs as appropriate. Because tears that
extend from the center of the meniscal tissue all the way to the peripheral rim are difficult to repair and removing this much meniscal tissue
leaves the joint surfaces unprotected, leading to early osteoarthritis,
addressing DLM tears as soon as they develop and before they extend
to the periphery is preferred. Approximately 9–17% of patients require
repeat operation, which is almost always due to repeated tear of the
meniscus. Patients with symptomatic DLM are 4.5 times more likely to
eventually require surgical treatment on their other knee.

A

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

718.2 Popliteal Cysts (Baker Cysts)
Anne M. Coyle and J. Todd R. Lawrence
Popliteal cysts or Baker cysts are simple cystic masses filled with gelatinous material that develops in the popliteal fossa, the shallow depression located at the posterior part of the knee. They are considered rare
in children. They most commonly occur in the region of the medial
head of the gastrocnemius and semimembranosus muscles as an isolated fluid-­filled bursa or via herniation through the posterior joint
capsule of the knee into this same location. Histologically, the cysts are
classified as fibrous, synovial, inflammatory, or transitional. Typically,
popliteal cysts resolve spontaneously, although the process may take
several years.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS

Patients commonly present with a unilateral mass behind the knee that
may be fairly large when first noted. Typically, there is no associated
history of trauma or knee injury. Physical examination reveals a firm
but compressible mass in the popliteal fossa, often medially located and
distal to the popliteal crease. The mass is usually most prominent when
the knee is extended. Transillumination of the cyst on physical examination is a simple diagnostic test. Knee radiographs are normal but
should be obtained to rule out other lesions, such as osteochondromas,
osteochondritis dissecans, and malignancies. Ultrasonography, MRI,
or aspiration may confirm the diagnosis. Ultrasound can be used to
confirm a simple cystic lesion in the expected anatomic location and is
often the only diagnostic test necessary with these reassuring findings.
However, if a solid mass, vascular lesion, or complex cystic lesion is
identified on ultrasound, an MRI may be used to further evaluate the
mass. Additionally, in the presence of a knee effusion, an MRI should
be considered to evaluate for knee intraarticular pathology that may be

B
Fig. 718.2 Surgical treatment of discoid lateral meniscus. Arthroscop-

ic images of a complete discoid lateral meniscus before (A) and after (B)
partial meniscectomy.

causing the swelling. These children should also be assessed for other
pathology that may cause recurrent or intermittent knee effusions,
including Lyme disease, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, or other autoimmune processes. The presence of a solid mass detected on ultrasound
or MRI warrants additional diagnostic testing and referral for biopsy.

TREATMENT

In most cases, reassurance is all that is needed for popliteal cysts
because they often resolve spontaneously. Rest and leg elevation can
be suggested to promote drainage of the fluid accumulating within
the cyst. In rare cases in which the cyst is persistently symptomatic,
treatment options include aspiration to reduce the size of the cyst and/
or corticosteroid injection to reduce inflammation. However, because

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4226 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
cysts often recur after treatment, the risk of these procedures is not usually worth the benefits. Surgical excision of a popliteal cyst is indicated
only when symptoms are debilitating and have not resolved after an
extended period of conservative treatment. If surgical excision is pursued, concurrent arthroscopic treatment of underlying joint pathology
is typically recommended to significantly decrease recurrence rates.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

718.3 Juvenile Osteochondritis Dissecans
Anne M. Coyle and J. Todd R. Lawrence
Osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) is a localized pathologic process
of the subchondral bone that secondarily affects the overlying articular cartilage and can progress to instability of the lesion with cartilage
separation and fragmentation. Although OCD may occur in different
joints, including the elbow and ankle, 75% of lesions are seen in the
knee. Emerging evidence suggests that the cause of OCD is vascular
insult to the developing knee that is unable to heal because of repetitive microtrauma. The disorder is being seen with rising frequency in
children and adolescents, with a higher incidence in patients >12 years
old, likely in large part because of the increased sports participation of
young athletes. OCD is more common in active children, and about
60% of cases occur in participants of high-­level athletics. The natural
history of juvenile OCD is not the same as that seen in adults. In the
knee, OCD most commonly affects the lateral aspect of the medial femoral condyle; however, the lateral femoral condyle and patella may also
be affected. Failure of both the bone and the cartilage surface to heal
completely is associated with an increased risk for developing premature osteoarthritis. Although the exact incidence of OCD is unknown,
it is estimated to occur bilaterally in 14–20% of patients.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS

The most common presenting complaint is a vague or deep knee pain
that is often activity related with no history of significant trauma to the
knee. If the osteochondral fragment becomes unstable, the patient may
also develop mechanical symptoms, such as catching or locking. Physical examination findings include effusion, tenderness to palpation
over the femoral condyles, quadriceps atrophy, and diminished range
of motion. It is important to conduct a thorough history and physical
examination because several other conditions can present similarly in
the pediatric population, including torn meniscus, patellofemoral pain
syndrome, and hip pathologies such as Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease and
slipped capital femoral epiphysis.
Imaging evaluation of OCD typically includes plain radiographs
and MRI. Radiographs can establish the diagnosis and can be used to
evaluate the treatment response. Because most OCD lesions are located
more on the posterior aspect of the femoral condyle, a PA radiograph
with a 45-­degree flexed knee (tunnel view) is often required to evaluate for the presence of an OCD. Many of these patients also have some
degree of patellar-­related pain, necessitating merchant (patellar) view
plain films. Thus standard radiographic evaluation of nontraumatic
adolescent knee pain should routinely include AP, lateral, tunnel, and
merchant radiographs of the knee. An early lesion may appear as a
small radiolucency at the articular surface. A more advanced lesion
may have a well-­demarcated segment of subchondral bone with a
lucent line demonstrating separation from the condyle. The clinical
significance of irregularities in the ossification center of the developing
epiphysis in children younger than 10 years is unclear.
MRI is useful for both diagnosing and characterizing OCD lesions.
It can be used to determine the size and stability of the OCD, the
integrity of the articular cartilage, and the presence of loose bodies.
Fluid observed between the fragment and subchondral bone suggests
an unstable lesion and a high risk for detachment. Any linear signal
through the articular cartilage or displacement of the fragment indicates a potentially unstable lesion as well. Cysts surrounding the OCD
can indicate instability if there are multiple or they are large in size.

However, when deciding treatment, it is important to consider both
the clinical and radiographic findings as the ability of MRI to predict
OCD stability in the pediatric population has been reported to be only
30–92% accurate. For an unstable-­appearing OCD, based on either the
patients’ symptoms and signs or the imaging, arthroscopy is considered the gold standard to determine stability and should be performed
to evaluate the status of the lesion.

TREATMENT

Treatment for juvenile OCD includes nonoperative and surgical
management, with treatment decisions being based on many factors,
including the growth status and skeletal maturity of the patient, the
presence of symptoms, the size of the lesion, whether the lesion appears
intact and stable, or if there is any suggestion of instability. The rate
of juvenile OCD healing without surgical intervention is estimated to
be 30–60%. Skeletal immaturity (i.e., younger age), smaller lesion size,
and the absence of mechanical symptoms or pain have been associated
with a higher likelihood of OCD healing with nonoperative treatment.
Unstable OCD lesions will not usually heal with conservative treatment and thus almost always require surgical intervention.
Young patients with stable lesions, as evidenced by an intact articular surface on imaging (Fig. 718.3A), are deemed to have an acceptable
probability of healing and are often initially managed conservatively
with a period of restricted weight-­bearing and immobilization, followed by a period of strict activity restriction and physical therapy
for 3-6 months. OCD healing is followed with radiographs, usually
at intervals of approximately 1.5-3 months, until lesion healing has
been noted. If healing has not been radiographically confirmed in 3-6
months, surgical intervention is often considered. Because of the low
rate of healing in skeletally mature patients, even intact lesions are not
usually managed conservatively in this patient population, and surgery
is recommended.
Although nonsurgical treatment may be successful in stable lesions,
surgical treatment of these lesions is often more successful. Surgery
also seems to induce healing at a faster rate than conservative treatment. Because surgical treatment has a very low complication rate and
a time frame of recovery that closely parallels a course of conservative
treatment, some patients may choose to pursue early surgical intervention instead of trying nonoperative treatment first. For stable and
intact lesions, surgical management involves arthroscopic evaluation
of the joint followed by either a transarticular or retroarticular drilling
to stimulate bony healing by creating channels in the subchondral bone
that allow revascularization to occur.
More advanced and unstable lesions with findings of edema beneath
the fragment, subchondral cyst formation, and partial (see Fig. 718.3B)
or complete (see Fig. 718.3C) fragment detachment on arthroscopy
are potentially salvageable and should be treated surgically. Treatment
involves drilling or fixation with possible bone grafting. OCD lesions
may progress and become unstable and dislodge into the joint space (see
Fig. 718.3D). Removal of the loose body in addition to cartilage repair
and restoration are typically performed for unstable, unsalvageable
lesions. In the postoperative period, patients usually require physical
therapy to regain strength and range of motion, with a gradual return to
baseline activity levels once full healing has been observed. Early identification and treatment of OCD lesions often prevents recurrent symptoms in adulthood and reduces the risk of early-­onset osteoarthritis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

718.4 Osgood-­Schlatter Disease and
Sinding-­Larsen-­Johansson Syndrome
Anne M. Coyle and J. Todd R. Lawrence
In skeletally immature patients, the tibial tubercle apophysis is an
extension of the proximal tibial epiphysis. As the femur rapidly grows
in length, patients often develop tight musculature, particularly of
the quadriceps, across the knee joint. These patients also develop

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 718 u The Knee

A

B

C

4227

D

Fig. 718.3 The spectrum of osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) pathology of the knee. A, A stable and intact lesion without breach of the overlying

articular cartilage. B, An OCD with fluid beneath the fragment, subchondral cyst formation, and partial fragment detachment. C, An unstable but
located lesion with fluid beneath the fragment, multiple subchondral cysts, and complete fragment detachment. D, A dislodged OCD lesion, resulting in a loose body within the knee joint space.

movement patterns that preferentially place stress on the knees during
physical activity instead of distributing that stress across other joints
in the lower extremity. The repetitive tensile microtrauma sustained
during sports or other athletic activities creates traction injuries at
the weak points in the extensor mechanism at the knee, as the stress
exceeds the developing skeleton’s ability to repair the damage.
Sinding-­Larsen-­Johansson (SLJ) syndrome and Osgood Schlatter (OS) disease are overuse injuries that occur at the most common
“weak points” in the system and are two of the most common causes
of anterior knee pain in children and adolescents. SLJ syndrome is an
insertional periostitis at the inferior pole of the patella. OS disease
is an irritation of the patellar tendon at its insertion into the tibial
tubercle or a traction apophysitis of the tibial tubercle growth plate.
These conditions typically present during periods of relative accelerated growth and self-­resolve within 12-24 months. SLJ syndrome tends
to occur in a slightly younger patient population most commonly ages
9-13 years, whereas OS disease presents in slightly older patients with
most symptomatic between the ages of 10-15 years. These conditions
are most common in very physically active children particularly those
that participate in sports such as basketball, volleyball, and soccer, in
which jumping, kicking, and squatting puts repetitive strain on the
patellar tendon.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS

Anterior knee pain, very specifically localized to the inferior pole of the
patella (SLJ syndrome) or over the tibial tubercle (OS disease), is the
most common patient complaint. Localized soft tissue swelling, along
with an eventual firm and fixed increased prominence at the tibial
tubercle, may occur with OS disease and may also be part of the initial complaint (Fig. 718.4). There is typically no acute traumatic inciting event, and the history of an acute traumatic onset of symptoms
should raise the possibility of a tibial tubercle fracture or patellar sleeve
fracture. The pain is aggravated by sports activities but may often persist with regular daily activities and even at rest. Physical examination
reveals point tenderness over the inferior pole of the patella (SLJ) or
over the tibial tubercle (OS disease). The presence of a knee effusion
should raise the possibility of other intraarticular pathology. Diagnosis
is usually made clinically, but radiographs may reveal fragmentation of
the tibial tubercle and soft tissue swelling consistent with OS disease
(Fig. 718.5) and be used to rule out other pathologies.
Another cause of patellar pain is fat pad impingement syndrome
(Hoffa disease), which is characterized by inflammation and swelling
of the infrapatellar fat pad, most often due to trauma or recent surgery.
Patients may have pain when extending the knee against resistance.

TREATMENT

In most patients, SLJ syndrome and OS disease are self-­limited processes and resolve with rest. Patients are treated with increasing levels

A

B

Fig. 718.4 Clinical manifestations of Osgood-­Schlatter disease. The
increased prominence of the tibial tubercle, indicated by the arrow, (A)
from traction apophysitis in a 15-­yr-­old male’s knee is contrasted with
the normal appearance of the tibial tubercle (B) in his contralateral, unaffected knee.

of activity restriction or immobilization to get them to a pain-­free state
before advancing their activities. For instance, if they have pain only
with running, but are pain free with normal daily activities, they may be
restricted from running but perform daily activities for 2 weeks before
advancing. In more severe cases, a knee immobilizer or even crutches
with restricted weight-­bearing are required to help the patient reach
a pain-­free state. Patients are usually advised to maintain this pain-­
free level of activity for 1-2 weeks before attempting to advance their
activities. Sports and other dynamic activities are restricted until the
patient is pain free with palpation and during daily activities for at least
2 weeks. During this rest period, addressing some of the contributing
factors, such as muscular tightness, can help prevent a recurrence with
activity resumption. A self-­directed stretching regimen, concentrating
on the quadriceps and hamstrings, may be provided. Some patients and
resistant cases may benefit from formal instruction in these exercises
with a physical therapist. Adjunctive therapy with ice (20 minutes every
2-4 hours and after activity) and NSAIDs (topical or oral) is common.
Communication with the patient and family members about the
disease and prognosis is an important component of treatment. Reassurance may be appropriate because some patients and parents fear
that the swollen tubercle may be a sign of a more significant pathology.
Patients and family members should be advised that the tibial tubercle
swelling will likely not fully resolve. Additionally, some evidence has
suggested that a subgroup of patients who are competitive athletes may

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4228 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

experience long-­term pain, and therefore options of treatment strategies and goals regarding participation in competitive sports may need
to be discussed.
Treatment with hyperosmolar dextrose local injections may improve
outcomes in patients with recalcitrant OS disease. However, corticosteroid injections are not recommended because of the risk of rupture of
the patellar tendon due to steroid-­induced atrophy. In the rare situation
in which young adults have persistent and disabling symptoms, surgical removal of ossicles from the tubercle or reduction of an enlarged
tibial tubercle may be warranted. Complications are rare and include
early closure of the tibial tubercle with recurvatum or hyperextension,
deformity, and, rarely, patellar tendon rupture or avulsion fracture of
the tibial tubercle. Although rare, these complications can have significant long-­term consequences and should thus prompt counseling to
avoid playing through the pain.

entertained. Buckling or a sense of the knee giving way can occur, but
there is rarely any true patellar or knee instability. Swelling is not common and, if present, should prompt further investigation.
On physical examination, reproduction of the patient’s pain with
palpation about the medial or lateral aspects of the patella and pain
during squatting have the highest sensitivity for PFPS. With the knee
extended and the quadriceps relaxed, placing pressure on the patella
and translating it distally into the top of the trochlear groove, the grind
test, often also causes pain. Two tests, the patellar tilt test and the patellar apprehension test, have been found to have low sensitivity but the
highest specificity for PFPS. The patellar tilt test is performed while
holding the patella between two fingers, and with the knee extended,
the medial patella is compressed posteriorly while simultaneously trying to elevate the lateral aspect of the patella. A fixed lateral aspect of
the patella indicates tight lateral structures. With the patellar apprehension test, there is resistance to forced lateral displacement of the
patella. Reproduction of the patient’s pain with these maneuvers is an
important component of the examination. Active and passive range of
motion of the knee, alignment of the lower extremity, knee ligamentous stability, patellar tracking, and gait should be evaluated to identify any obvious causes of malalignment or an unstable patella. These
patients often have tight quadriceps, hamstrings, and heel cords, along
with weak hip musculature and poor overall balance. A single leg squat
can often highlight the hip weakness and balance and alignment issues
that contribute to this condition.
Radiographs are not required for diagnosis as there are no structural defects in PFPS; however, routine radiographs of the knee, including AP, lateral, tunnel (PA with 45-­degree flexed knee), and merchant
(patellar) views, are sometimes obtained to eliminate other etiologies
of vague knee pain, such as OCD. Radiographs of the hip should be
considered to rule out hip pathology, such as a slipped capital femoral
epiphysis, which can manifest as ill-­defined knee pain in adolescents
as well. An MRI is not routinely required for evaluation but should be
considered in any patient with a history of mechanical symptoms or
an effusion. MRI should be considered in cases refractory to standard
treatments as well.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

TREATMENT

A

B

Fig. 718.5 Radiographic findings of Osgood-­Schlatter disease. A,

Lateral radiograph of the knee of a 13-­yr-­old male demonstrates a sliver
of new bone formation (arrow) at the tibial tubercle. B, Lateral radiograph of the same child at 15 yr of age demonstrates characteristic
fragmentation (arrow) of the tibial tubercle.

718.5 Patellofemoral Pain Syndrome
Anne M. Coyle and J. Todd R. Lawrence
Also known as anterior knee pain syndrome, patellofemoral pain syndrome (PFPS) is one of the most common causes of knee pain and
is characterized by pain located around or behind the patella that is
elicited during activities that load the patella during knee flexion and
weight-­bearing such as squatting and running. PFPS affects 6–7% of
the general adolescent population and up to 25% of teens who participate in sports. Females are estimated to account for 55–62% cases. Previously, PFPS was thought to arise from a deranged patellar articular
surface; however, increasing evidence shows that anterior knee pain is
frequently present even with normal articular cartilage of the patella.
Even though abnormal patellar tracking may have a role in in the
pathogenesis, the precise etiology of the knee pain remains unknown
and is likely multifactorial. In adolescents, repetitive loading of the
knee joint without adequate time for recovery is thought to be a key
factor in developing PFPS.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS

Pain is usually described as being beneath or near the patella. The pain
is worse with bent knee activities, such as walking up and down stairs,
because these activities put the patella under high compressive loads.
Squatting, running, and other vigorous physical activities also exacerbate the anterior knee pain. Sitting in a flexed knee position for an
extended period of time, the so-­called theater sign, is another common complaint and is often relieved through knee extension. The onset
of symptoms in usually gradual, with no history of trauma. If a traumatic etiology is noted, consideration for other etiologies should be

Several methods of nonoperative treatment are used to address
PFPS. The mainstay of treatment is continued physiotherapy, involving overall lower-­extremity stretching and strengthening, including
short-­arc quadriceps strengthening, hip and core strengthening, and
exercises designed to address balance and overall body positioning
during dynamic activities. Home exercise programs can be effective
for the properly disciplined and motivated patient, but formal physical
therapy should be considered in resistant cases or in patients who are
unable to adhere to a self-­directed program. Combining physiotherapy
with activity modification and load management during treatment is
associated with an increased rate of return to sports. Orthoses, including patellar taping, knee sleeves, customized knee braces, or even shoe
inserts are often used in conjunction with physical therapy. Knee taping alone does not improve pain; however, exercise therapy in combination with knee taping has a greater reduction in pain than exercise
therapy alone. Evidence for long-­term benefit from other orthotic use
is unclear. Treatment with botulinum toxin injections, nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory medications, or therapeutic ultrasound is not substantiated. Despite these efforts, 40% of adolescents will have some
pain that continues into early adulthood and significantly affects their
quality of life, knee function, and physical activity. Surgical treatment
of PFPS is rarely necessary.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

718.6 Patellofemoral Instability
Anne M. Coyle and J. Todd R. Lawrence
The stable tracking of the patellofemoral joint in the front of the knee
depends on a balance of the static restraints and the dynamic forces

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 718 u The Knee

4229

*
*

A

B

Fig. 718.6 A 14-­yr-­old female with patellar instability. A, A T2-­weighted fat suppression axial image through the mid-­patella and proximal trochlea

demonstrates the characteristic bone bruise pattern on the medial patella and along the lateral femoral condyle that occurs when the dislocated
medial patella impacts the lateral femur (asterisks). Injury to the patellar attachment of the medial patellofemoral ligament is also visible at the medial patella. The patella is laterally subluxated in a dysplastic trochlea that is flat to slightly convex (arrowheads) instead of having a normal concave
shape. B, A proton density weighted sagittal image through the center of the knee and patella demonstrates patella alta, with the distance from the
anterior tibia to the inferior aspect of the patellar cartilage (dotted line) being much longer than the length of the patellar cartilage.

acting on the patella. These include the restraining ligaments and the
articular anatomy of the patellofemoral groove that serve to balance the
dynamic forces of the quadriceps mechanism and overall limb positioning. During knee flexion, the pull of the quadriceps mechanism
tends to place an overall lateral displacing force at the patella. The Q
angle refers to the deviation between the angle of the patellar tendon
and the line of the quadriceps. Wider hips and valgus (knock-­kneed)
positioning increase the Q angle and thus the lateral force applied at
the patella. In extension, the static restraints, including the medial
restraining ligaments, primarily the medial patellofemoral ligament,
are responsible for guiding the patella into the trochlear groove in the
distal femur. Once in the trochlea, the bony congruity becomes the primary restraint to the net lateral forces.
Factors that contribute to patellofemoral instability are multifactorial, including ligamentous laxity; trochlear dysplasia, creating a shallow sulcus; condylar hypoplasia; patella alta (a high-­riding patella);
or malalignment that effectively increases the Q angle, such as genu
valgum, increased femoral anteversion, or a lateralized tibial tubercle.
Acute patellofemoral dislocation is the most common acute knee
disorder in children and adolescents between ages 10-19 years and
often occurs after a sudden valgus strain during sports participation,
but it may also be the result of direct trauma. Recurrent patellofemoral subluxation is more than one episode of patellar subluxation without frank dislocation. Lateral malalignment of the extensor mechanism
and trochlear dysplasia are the most common etiologic factors. Habitual dislocation of the patella describes patellar dislocation occurring
during every knee flexion/extension cycle. A dysplastic knee with contracture of the lateral portion of the quadriceps mechanism is often
associated. Several syndromes are associated with patellar instability,
including Down syndrome (see Chapter 57), Turner syndrome (see
Chapter 626.1), Kabuki syndrome (see Chapter 102.2), and Rubinstein-­
Taybi syndrome (see Chapter 102.3).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS

With an acute patellar dislocation, patients will recall the acute event
and the sensation that their kneecap was out of place. A focused,
detailed history is important for characterizing the instability. Straightening the knee is all that is usually required to reduce the patella, but
sometimes this requires medical attention. Swelling is typically apparent immediately after the injury and appreciable on examination as

a large effusion. Pain along the knee from the medial patella to the
medial epicondyle of the femur is common. Lateral patellar translocation with the knee extended should be tested with the patellar apprehension test. In the acute setting, there will be increased translation
and pain and a feeling of insecurity. Patellar tracking is also an important component of the examination but may not be possible due to pain
in the acute setting. The J sign refers to the inverted J-­path the patella
takes, beginning in a laterally subluxated position and then suddenly
shifting medially to engage the femoral groove with early knee flexion.
The torsional profile of the extremity is also important to assess to rule
out possible rotational abnormalities of the femur or tibia.
Radiographs of a patient with patellar instability should include AP,
lateral, and merchant views (obtained with the knee bent 45 degrees,
with the beam of the x-­ray through the knee from head to toe) of the
patella. In children and adolescents with acute patellar dislocations,
osteochondral injuries are present in up to 75% of cases. Radiographs
should also be carefully examined for occult fractures. In the presence
of a significant knee effusion, mechanical symptoms, acute traumatic
patellar dislocation, or uncertainty in the diagnosis, further investigation should include an MRI to evaluate for loose bodies or cartilage
damage. MRI will demonstrate bone bruise patterns typical of patellar dislocation at the medial patellar facet and at the lateral femoral
condyle and a tear in the medial patellofemoral ligament (Fig. 718.6).
Risk factors for recurrent instability include skeletal immaturity, ligamentous laxity, patella alta (see Fig. 718.6), trochlear dysplasia (see Fig.
718.6), and lateralized tibial tubercle (particularly one situated outside
the lateral trochlear ridge).

TREATMENT

Nonoperative management that includes activity restriction, bracing, and
physical therapy with return to full activity within in 3-4 months is initially recommended for first-­time, acute patellar dislocation and recurrent
patellar subluxation, unless a large osteochondral fracture or additional
intraarticular pathology is seen on imaging studies. Short-­term immobilization for 3 weeks in extension with a posterior splint has been shown
to significantly decrease the risk of redislocation. After this, transition to
a patellar stabilizing brace usually improves symptoms. Successful treatment is usually achieved with formal physical therapy aimed at improving
extensor muscle tone, particularly the vastus medialis obliquus, activity-­
related body positioning, stretching the iliotibial band, and hip and core

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4230 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
muscle strengthening. Current criteria to return to full activity after conservative management requires absence of pain, recurring patellar instability, and knee effusion, as well as full range of motion, adequate core
strength and endurance, psychologic readiness, hop test showing limb
symmetry >85%, and satisfactory performance on sport-­specific drills.
Recurrent, ipsilateral patellofemoral instability is reported in up to 36%
of skeletally mature patients. However, the reported redislocation rate in
skeletally immature patients is as high as 69%. Risk factors for recurrence
include younger age at time of first dislocation, ligamentous laxity, open
physes, trochlear dysplasia (shallow trochlea), and extensor mechanism
malalignment. Patients at high risk for recurrent dislocation may elect to
undergo surgical stabilization early to prevent additional traumatic cartilage damage from a repeat dislocation, but early stabilization after the first
dislocation is not currently a mainstay of treatment.
Failure to improve after nonoperative treatment and persistent
patellar subluxation or experiencing a recurrent dislocation are the
major indications for surgical intervention. Patients are considered
surgical candidates for early intervention if there are loose bodies,
osteochondral fractures, or chondral damage to prevent mechanical
blocking of motion. Many different types of surgical procedures exist
to prevent dislocation of the patella, but almost all include reconstruction of the medial patellofemoral ligament. Distal realignment of the
patellar tendon insertion with a tibial tubercle osteotomy can help
improve overall alignment and is often included as part of the stabilization procedure in skeletally mature adolescents. In skeletally immature patients, surgical reconstruction with physeal-­sparing techniques
can be performed. Guided growth techniques can be used in patients
with growth remaining (typically 6 months–1 year) to correct overall
alignment. The surgical approach should be patient specific depending on the pathoanatomy contributing to the recurrent instability for
best outcomes. Return to full activity criteria is similar to that for
nonsurgical management but the timeline may be adjusted based on
underlying pathology and bone healing. Recurrence of patellofemoral
instability after surgical intervention is estimated to be around 20%.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

718.7 Anterior Cruciate Ligament Rupture
Anne M. Coyle and J. Todd R. Lawrence
Anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) tears account for more than half of all
knee injuries. Young age is a known risk factor with peak incidence at
16-18 years old. Pediatric ACL reconstruction has become more prevalent as ACL tears in skeletally immature patients have greatly increased
in recent years. This increase is likely due to increased sports participation, increased intensity of training and competition, and participation
on multiple teams. Heightened awareness and improved methods for
diagnosis are also likely contributing factors to the growing awareness
of ACL injuries in children and adolescents.
Females are known to have up to a twofold increased risk for ACL
injury compared to males playing the same sport. The gender-­specific
discrepancy appears to be caused mostly by insufficient neuromuscular activation patterns in females, resulting in increased dynamic genu
valgum (knock-­knee), biased limb alignment when landing, and therefore a heightened tendency toward landing or stopping in an injury-­
prone position. Other nonmodifiable risk factors include generalized
joint laxity, knee recurvatum (hyperextension), femoral anteversion,
and contralateral ACL injury. Various pediatric ACL injury prevention
programs have shown benefits in not only reducing the rate of injuries
but also in increasing athletic strength and performance. Studies also
indicate that universal implementation of injury prevention programs
can be a cost-­effective prevention strategy.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS

Most ACL tears occur as a result of a noncontact injury involving a
rapid pivoting, cutting, landing, or stopping maneuver. Patients with
an acute knee injury from one of these activities who present with

knee effusion and report a “pop” have a 70% chance of an ACL tear.
The pop sensation occurs at the time of injury with later development
of swelling, limited range of motion, and sometimes a sensation of
instability. After the initial injury, patients may have surprisingly little
pain. On physical examination, the anterior drawer sign or Lachman
test may indicate increased anterior tibial translation. The Lachman
examination is performed by applying an anteriorly directed force to
the proximal tibia with the femur stabilized and the knee flexed 20-30
degrees. The amount of translation and the end point are assessed, with
increased translation and an indistinct end point indicating a positive
test. A pivot shift test can also be performed to confirm the diagnosis, but it is rarely tolerated in the conscious patient. It is conducted
by gently bending the knee while just supporting the lower leg. A
gentle valgus stress and slight internal rotation can enhance the shift.
Assessment for concurrent injury to the medial collateral ligament and
medial or lateral menisci should be considered as concurrent tears can
be present in up to 45% of ACL tears.
Radiographs of the knee are performed, including AP, lateral, tunnel (PA with 45 degrees flexed knee), and merchant (patellar) views,
to assess for other potential injuries common in pediatric and adolescent patients, such as tibial spine avulsion fractures or OCD. In acute
traumatic injuries, internal and external oblique radiographs can also
be helpful. Ultimately, knee MRI is usually necessary to confirm the
presence of an intrasubstance ACL tear and any associated meniscal
or chondral pathology (Fig. 718.7). Arthroscopic evaluation is the gold
standard for diagnosis and treatment.

TREATMENT

The management of ACL injury in this patient population can be
challenging, and the severity of the ACL tear and the degree of knee
instability are important in directing treatment. Incomplete or partial ACL tears with a firm endpoint on examination may be treated
nonoperatively, and the patient’s and family’s understanding and willingness to adhere to a protocol of bracing and activity restriction are
important factors in optimizing outcomes. For complete tears of the
ACL, surgical reconstruction is the preferred treatment for patients
who are physically, mentally, and emotionally capable of maintaining
precautions and complying with the long rehabilitation course after
the procedure. Increasing evidence suggests that optimal timing for
surgical intervention is within 3 months of injury to reduce the likelihood of additional damage occurring in the knee. While timing does
not seem to affect recovery of knee stability, the risk of meniscal injury
is up to 4.5 times higher when surgical intervention is delayed. Use
of autologous tissue for ACL reconstruction is usually recommended
for young active patients due to a lower risk of reinjury compared to
allograft tissue. Growth-­respecting ACL reconstruction techniques,
such as all-­epiphyseal, partial transphyseal, or traditional transphyseal reconstruction techniques, are used based on the skeletal maturity of the patient to minimize the risk for growth disturbance across
the distal femoral and proximal tibial physes. The ultimate treatment
course is an individual decision for the patient and family to make in
consultation with their physician.
Depending on the technique used for reconstruction and any
associated meniscal pathology addressed, weight-­bearing is initially
restricted, and a brace is used for the first 4-6 weeks postoperatively.
Physical therapy is started postoperatively and continued until strength
and functional testing are equal to the contralateral, unaffected limb.
Injury prevention through neuromuscular training is built into the
final phases of the rehabilitation and final screening tests to try to minimize the risk of reinjury. Most patients regain full range of motion and
report no pain by 12 weeks after surgery. Patients return to sports typically at a minimum of 9-12 months postoperatively and are followed
on a yearly basis thereafter until skeletal maturity to monitor progress
and for any signs of growth disturbance. The majority of athletes are
able to return to their same level of competition. The role of using a
brace following ACL reconstruction is not established. Rehabilitation
programs focused on strengthening, proximal control exercises, and
incorporation of various exercise genres have significantly reduced the
recurrence in female athletes. However, despite extensive prevention

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 719 u The Hip 4231

*
*
A

B

Fig. 718.7 A 14-­yr-­old female with full-­thickness anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) tear. A, A T2-­weighted fat-­suppression sagittal image through

the center of the knee demonstrates a full-­thickness tear of the ACL with a folded stump near the tibial attachment. (arrow). B, A T2-­weighted fat-­
suppression sagittal image through the lateral compartment demonstrates the characteristic kissing contusion pattern in the distal femoral condyle
and posterior tibial plateau related to the anterior pivot shift that occurs during the ACL injury (asterisks).

efforts, secondary injury rates within 24 months of ACL reconstruction remain very high when patients elect to return to risky sports.
The sports with the greatest risk for ACL tears are soccer, basketball,
and lacrosse for females and football, soccer, and lacrosse for males.
Revision of ACL reconstructions has been associated with increased
complications.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 719

The Hip
Wudbhav N. Sankar, Jennifer J. Winell,
B. David Horn, and Lawrence Wells
Anatomically, the hip joint is a ball-­and-­socket articulation between
the femoral head and acetabulum. The hip joint is a pivotal joint of the
lower extremity, and its functional demands require both stability and
flexibility.

GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT

The hip joint begins to develop at about the seventh week of gestation, when a cleft appears in the mesenchyme of the primitive limb
bud. These precartilaginous cells differentiate into a fully formed
cartilaginous femoral head and acetabulum by the eleventh week
of gestation (see Chapter 21). At birth, the neonatal acetabulum is
completely composed of cartilage, with a thin rim of fibrocartilage
called the labrum.

The very cellular hyaline cartilage of the acetabulum is continuous
with the triradiate cartilages, which divide and interconnect the three
osseous components of the pelvis (the ilium, ischium, and pubis).
The concave shape of the hip joint is determined by the presence of a
spherical femoral head.
Several factors determine acetabular depth, including interstitial
growth within the acetabular cartilage, appositional growth under the
perichondrium, and growth of adjacent bones (the ilium, ischium, and
pubis). In the neonate, the entire proximal femur is a cartilaginous
structure, which includes the femoral head and the greater and lesser
trochanters. The three main growth areas are the physeal plate, the
growth plate of the greater trochanter, and the femoral neck isthmus.
Between the fourth and seventh month of life, the proximal femoral
ossification center (in the center of the femoral head) appears. This
ossification center continues to enlarge, along with its cartilaginous
anlage, until adult life, when only a thin layer of articular cartilage
remains. During this period of growth, the thickness of the cartilage
surrounding this bony nucleus gradually decreases, as does the thickness of the acetabular cartilage. The growth of the proximal femur is
affected by muscle pull, the forces transmitted across the hip joint with
weight bearing, normal joint nutrition, circulation, and muscle tone.
Alterations in these factors can cause profound changes in the development of the proximal femur.

VASCULAR SUPPLY

The blood supply to the capital femoral epiphysis is complex and
changes with growth of the proximal femur. The proximal femur
receives its arterial supply from intraosseous (primarily the medial
femoral circumflex artery) and extraosseous vessels (Fig. 719.1).
The retinacular vessels (extraosseous) lie on the surface of the
femoral neck but are intracapsular because they enter the epiphysis from the periphery. This makes the blood supply vulnerable to
damage from septic arthritis, trauma, thrombosis, and other vascular insults. Interruption of this tenuous blood supply can lead to
avascular necrosis of the femoral head and permanent deformity of
the hip.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4232 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Posterior ascending
cervical arteries
Branches to
superior gluteal artery
Lateral ascending
cervical arteries

Medial ascending
cervical arteries
Branches to
obturator
externus
muscle

FEMORAL NECK

Medial
circumflex
femoral
artery

Anterior ascending
cervical arteries
ILIOPSOAS MUSCLE
Femoral
artery

Profundus femoral
artery

Lateral circumflex femoral
artery

719.1 Developmental Dysplasia of the Hip
Wudbhav N. Sankar, B. David Horn, Jennifer J. Winell,
and Lawrence Wells
Developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH) refers to a spectrum of
pathology in the development of the immature hip joint. Formerly
called congenital dislocation of the hip, DDH more accurately describes
the variable presentation of the disorder, encompassing mild dysplasia
as well as frank dislocation.

CLASSIFICATION

Acetabular dysplasia refers to abnormal morphology and development
of the acetabulum. Hip subluxation is defined as only partial contact
between the femoral head and acetabulum. Hip dislocation refers to a
hip with no contact between the articulating surfaces of the hip. DDH
is classified into two major groups: typical and teratologic. Typical
DDH occurs in otherwise normal patients or those without defined
syndromes or genetic conditions. Teratologic hip dislocations usually
have identifiable causes, such as arthrogryposis or a genetic syndrome,
and occur before birth.

ETIOLOGY AND RISK FACTORS

Although the etiology remains unknown, the final common pathway
in the development of DDH is increased laxity of the joint, which fails
to maintain a stable femoroacetabular articulation. This increased
laxity is probably the result of a combination of hormonal, mechanical, and genetic factors. A positive family history for DDH is found
in 12–33% of affected patients. DDH is more common among female
patients (80%), which is thought to be because of the greater susceptibility of female fetuses to maternal hormones, such as relaxin, which
increases ligamentous laxity. Although only 3–4% of all babies are
born in breech presentation, the incidence of DDH in these patients
is 16–25%.
Any condition that leads to a tighter intrauterine space and, consequently, less room for normal fetal motion may be associated with
DDH. These conditions include oligohydramnios, large birth weight,
and first pregnancy. The high rate of association of DDH with other
intrauterine molding abnormalities, such as torticollis and metatarsus
adductus, supports the theory that the crowding phenomenon has a role
in the pathogenesis. The left hip is the most commonly affected hip.
In the most common fetal position, the left hip is usually forced into
adduction by the mother’s sacrum.

Fig. 719.1 Diagram of vascular anatomy of
the proximal femur.

Tight swaddling with the hips in the extended position has been
identified as an important risk factor for the development of hip dysplasia. Population studies of cultures that prefer immobilizing children
in hip extension have shown that swaddling in such a way that prevents
an infant from naturally drawing their hips to their chest (so called “M”
position) is detrimental for hip development.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Although most newborn screening studies suggest that some degree
of hip instability can be detected in 1 in 100 to 1 in 250 babies, actual
dislocated or dislocatable hips are much less common, being found in
1-1.5 of 1,000 live births.
There is marked geographic and racial variation in the incidence of
DDH. These differences may result from environmental factors, such
as child-­rearing practices, rather than genetic predisposition. African
and Asian caregivers have traditionally carried babies against their
bodies in a shawl so that a child’s hips are flexed, abducted, and free to
move. This keeps the hips in the optimal position for stability and for
dynamic molding of the developing acetabulum by the cartilaginous
femoral head. Children in Native American and Eastern European cultures, which have a relatively high incidence of DDH, have historically
been swaddled in confining clothes that bring their hips into extension. This position increases the tension of the psoas muscle-­tendon
unit and might predispose the hips to displace and eventually dislocate
laterally and superiorly.

PATHOANATOMY

In DDH, several secondary anatomic changes can prevent reduction.
Both the fatty tissue in the depths of the socket, known as the pulvinar, and the ligamentum teres can hypertrophy, blocking reduction of
the femoral head. The transverse acetabular ligament usually thickens
as well, which effectively narrows the opening of the acetabulum. In
addition, the shortened iliopsoas tendon becomes taut across the front
of the hip, creating an hourglass shape to the hip capsule, which limits access to the acetabulum. Over time, the dislocated femoral head
places pressure on the acetabular rim and labrum, causing the labrum
to infold and become thick.
The shape of a normal femoral head and acetabulum depends on a
concentric reduction between the two. The more time that a hip spends
dislocated, the more likely that the acetabulum will develop abnormally. Without a femoral head to provide a template, the acetabulum
will become progressively shallow, with an oblique acetabular roof and
a thickened medial wall.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 719 u The Hip 4233
CLINICAL FINDINGS
The Neonate

DDH in the neonate is asymptomatic and must be screened for in all
newborns by specific maneuvers. Physical examination must be carried
out with the infant unclothed and placed supine in a warm, comfortable setting on a flat examination table.
The Barlow provocative maneuver assesses the potential for dislocation of an initially nondisplaced hip. The examiner adducts the flexed
hip and gently pushes the thigh posteriorly in an effort to dislocate the
femoral head (Fig. 719.2). In a positive test, the hip is felt to slide out of
the acetabulum. As the examiner relaxes the proximal push, the hip can
be felt to slip back into the acetabulum.
The Ortolani test is the reverse of the Barlow test: The examiner
attempts to reduce a hip that is dislocated at rest (Fig. 719.3). The
examiner grasps the child’s thigh between the thumb and index finger
and, with the fourth and fifth fingers, lifts the greater trochanter while
simultaneously abducting the hip. When the test is positive, the femoral head will slip into the socket with a delicate clunk that is palpable
but usually not audible. It should be a gentle, nonforced maneuver.

A hip click is the high-­pitched sensation (or sound) felt at the very
end of abduction during testing for DDH with Barlow and Ortolani
maneuvers. A hip click can be differentiated from a hip clunk, which
is felt as the femoral head goes in and out of joint. Hip clicks usually
originate in the ligamentum teres or occasionally in the fascia lata or
psoas tendon and do not indicate a significant hip abnormality.

The Infant

As the baby enters the second and third month of life, the soft tissues
begin to tighten, and the Ortolani and Barlow tests are no longer reliable. In this age-­group, the examiner must look for other specific physical findings, including limited hip abduction, apparent shortening of the
thigh, proximal location of the greater trochanter, asymmetry of the gluteal or thigh folds (Fig. 719.4), and positioning of the hip. Limitation of
abduction is the most reliable sign of a dislocated hip in this age-­group.
Shortening of the thigh, the Galeazzi sign, is best appreciated by placing
both hips in 90 degrees of flexion and comparing the height of the knees,
looking for asymmetry (Fig. 719.5). Asymmetry of gluteal skin creases
may be a sign of hip dysplasia. Another helpful test is the Klisic test, in
which the examiner places the third finger over the greater trochanter and
the index finger of the same hand on the anterior superior iliac spine. In
a normal hip, an imaginary line drawn between the two fingers points to
the umbilicus. In the dislocated hip, the trochanter is elevated, and the line
projects halfway between the umbilicus and the pubis (Fig. 719.6).

A

B
Fig. 719.2 The Barlow provocative test is performed with the pa-

tient’s knees and hips flexed. A, Holding the patient’s limbs gently,
with the thigh in adduction, the examiner applies a posteriorly directed
force. B, This test is positive in a dislocatable hip.

Fig. 719.4 Asymmetry of thigh folds in a child with developmental
dysplasia of the hip.

A

B
Fig. 719.3 The Ortolani maneuver is the sign of the ball of the femo-

ral head moving in and out of the acetabulum. A, The examiner holds
the patient’s thigh and gently abducts the hip while lifting the greater
trochanter with two fingers. B, When the test is positive, the dislocated
femoral head falls back into the acetabulum with a palpable clunk as
the hip is abducted.

Fig. 719.5 Positive Galeazzi sign noted in a case of untreated developmental dysplasia of the hip.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4234 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
The Walking Child

The walking child often presents to the physician after the family
has noticed a limp, a waddling gait, or a leg-­length discrepancy. The
affected side appears shorter than the normal extremity, and the child
toe-­walks on the affected side. The Trendelenburg sign (see Chapter 714) is positive in these children, and an abductor lurch is usually
observed when the child walks. As in the younger child, there is limited
hip abduction on the affected side and the knees are at different levels
when the hips are flexed (the Galeazzi sign). Excessive lordosis, which
develops secondary to altered hip mechanics, is common and is often
the presenting complaint.

DIAGNOSTIC TESTING
Ultrasonography

Because it is superior to radiographs for evaluating cartilaginous structures, ultrasonography is the diagnostic modality of choice for DDH
before the appearance of the femoral head ossific nucleus (4-6 months).
During the early newborn period (0-4 weeks), however, physical examination is preferred over ultrasonography because there is a high incidence of false-­positive sonograms in this age-­group. Therefore, waiting
to obtain an ultrasound until the infant is at least 6 weeks of age is
recommended unless the child has a strongly positive physical examination. In addition to elucidating the static relationship of the femur to
the acetabulum, ultrasonography provides dynamic information about
the stability of the hip joint. The ultrasound examination can be used to
NORMAL

A

DISLOCATED

monitor acetabular development, particularly of infants in Pavlik harness treatment; this method can minimize the number of radiographs
taken and might allow the clinician to detect treatment failure earlier.
In the Graf technique, the transducer is placed over the greater
trochanter, which allows visualization of the ilium, the bony acetabulum, the labrum, and the femoral epiphysis (Fig. 719.7). The angle
formed by the line of the ilium and a line tangential to the bony roof
of the acetabulum is termed the α angle and represents the depth of
the acetabulum. Values >60 degrees are considered normal, and those
<60 degrees imply acetabular dysplasia. The β angle is formed by a line
drawn tangential to the labrum and the line of the ilium; this represents the cartilaginous roof of the acetabulum. A normal β angle is <55
degrees; as the femoral head subluxates, the β angle increases. Another
useful test is to evaluate the position of the center of the head compared
with the vertical line of the ilium. If the line of the ilium falls lateral to
the center of the head, the epiphysis is considered reduced. If the line
falls medial to the center of the head, the epiphysis is uncovered and is
either subluxated or dislocated.
Screening for DDH with ultrasound remains controversial. Although
routinely performed in Europe, meta-­analyses indicate that data are
insufficient to give clear recommendations. In the United States, the
current recommendations are that every newborn undergo a clinical
examination for hip instability. Children who have findings suspicious
for DDH should be followed up with ultrasound. Most authors agree
that infants with risk factors for DDH (breech position, family history,
torticollis) should be screened with ultrasound regardless of the clinical findings.

Radiography

B

Fig. 719.6 Klisic test. A, In a normal hip, an imaginary line drawn

down through the tip of an index finger placed on the patient’s iliac
crest and the tip of the long finger placed on the patient’s greater trochanter should point to the umbilicus. B, In a dislocated hip, this line
drawn through the two fingertips runs below the umbilicus because the
greater trochanter is abnormally high.

Radiographs are recommended for an infant once the proximal femoral
epiphysis ossifies, usually by 4-6 months. In infants of this age, radiographs have proven to be more effective, less costly, and less operator
dependent than an ultrasound examination. An anteroposterior (AP)
view of the pelvis can be interpreted with the aid of several classic lines
drawn on it (Fig. 719.8).
Hilgenreiner’s line is a horizontal line drawn through the top of
both triradiate cartilages (the clear area in the depth of the acetabulum). Perkins line is a vertical line through the most lateral ossified
margin of the roof of the acetabulum, drawn perpendicular to Hilgenreiner’s line. The ossific nucleus of the femoral head should be located
in the medial lower quadrant of the intersection of these two lines.
Shenton’s line is a curved line drawn from the medial aspect of the
femoral neck to the lower border of the superior pubic ramus. In a
child with normal hips, this line is a continuous contour. In a child with
hip subluxation or dislocation, this line consists of two separate arcs
and is described as “broken.”



A

  65°



B

  42°

Fig. 719.7 A, Normal ultrasonographic image of the hip in an infant.
The α angle is >60 degrees. Note
that a line drawn tangential to the
ilium falls lateral to the center of the
femoral head. B, In this child with developmental dysplasia of the hip, the
left hip demonstrates an α angle of 42
degrees, and a line drawn tangential
to the ilium shows that <50% of the
femoral head is contained within the
acetabulum.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Perkins line

Hilgenreiner's
line

Perkins line

Chapter 719 u The Hip 4235

Hilgenreiner's line

32°

38°

Acetabular
index

Acetabular
index

A

Shenton's line Shenton's line
(NORMAL)
(BROKEN)

B

C

Normal Shenton's line

Fig. 719.8 A-­C, Radiographic measurements are useful in evaluating developmental dysplasia of the hip. Hilgenreiner’s line is drawn through the
triradiate cartilages. Perkins line is drawn perpendicular to Hilgenreiner’s line at the lateral edge of the acetabulum. The ossific nucleus of the femoral head should be located in the medial lower quadrant of the intersection of these two lines. Shenton’s line curves along the femoral metaphysis
and connects smoothly to the inner margin of the pubis. In a child with hip subluxation or dislocation, this line consists of two separate arcs and is
described as broken. The acetabular index is the angle between a line drawn along the margin of the acetabulum and Hilgenreiner’s line; in normal
newborns, it averages 27.5 degrees and decreases with age.

there is for acetabular and proximal femoral remodeling, and the more
complex the required treatments.

Newborns and Infants Younger Than 6 Months

Perkin line

Center–edge angle
of Wilberg

Fig. 719.9 Center–edge angle of Wilberg, which is the angle that is

formed between the Perkin’s line and a line drawn from the lateral lip
of the acetabulum through the center of the femoral head. This angle,
which is a useful measure of hip position in older children, is considered
normal if it is more than 19 degrees in children between the ages of 6
and 13 years. It increases with age. (From Kim HK, Herring JA. Developmental dysplasia of the hip. In: Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s Pediatric
Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig.13.31.)

The acetabular index is the angle formed between Hilgenreiner’s
line and a line drawn from the depth of the acetabular socket to the
most lateral ossified margin of the roof of the acetabulum. This angle
measures the development of the osseous roof of the acetabulum. In
the newborn, the acetabular index can be up to 40 degrees; by 4 months
in the normal infant, it should be no more than 30 degrees. In the older
child, the center-­edge angle of Wilberg is a useful measure of femoral
head coverage. This angle is formed at the juncture of the Perkins line
and a line connecting the lateral margin of the acetabulum to the center
of the femoral head (Fig. 719.9). In children 6-13 years, an angle >19
degrees is normal, whereas in children 14 years and older, an angle >25
degrees is considered normal.

TREATMENT

The goals in the management of DDH are to obtain and maintain a
concentric reduction of the femoral head within the acetabulum to
provide the optimal environment for the normal development of both
the femoral head and acetabulum. The later the diagnosis of DDH is
made, the more difficult it is to achieve these goals, the less potential

Newborns’ hips that are Barlow positive (reduced but dislocatable) or
Ortolani positive (dislocated but reducible) should generally be treated
with a Pavlik harness as soon as the diagnosis is made. The management of newborns with dysplasia who are younger than 4 weeks of age
is less clear. A significant proportion of these hips normalize within
3-4 weeks; consequently, many physicians prefer to reexamine these
newborns after a few weeks before making treatment decisions. A
study of newborns with mildly dysplastic hips based on the results of
an ultrasound (alpha angles between 43 and 50 degrees) and who were
randomly assigned to receive immediate abduction splinting or active
sonographic surveillance from birth with Frejka splinting (if treatment
was subsequently needed) revealed no difference in radiologic findings
at 6 years of age.
Triple diapers or abduction diapers have no place in the treatment of
DDH in the newborn; they are usually ineffective and give the family a
false sense of security. Acetabular dysplasia, subluxation, or dislocation
can all be readily managed with the Pavlik harness. Although other
braces are available (von Rosen splint, Ilfeld splint, Frejka pillow), the
Pavlik harness remains the most commonly used device worldwide
(Fig. 719.10). By maintaining the Ortolani-­positive hip in a Pavlik harness on a full-­time basis for 6 weeks, hip instability resolves in approximately 75% of cases. After 6 months of age, the failure rate for the
Pavlik harness is >50% because it is difficult to maintain the increasingly active and crawling child in the harness. Frequent examinations
and readjustments are necessary to ensure that the harness is correctly
fitted. The anterior straps of the harness should be set to maintain the
hips in flexion (usually ∼90-100 degrees); excessive flexion is discouraged because of the risk of femoral nerve palsy. The posterior straps
are designed to encourage abduction. These are generally set to allow
adduction just to neutral, because forced abduction by the harness can
lead to avascular necrosis of the femoral epiphysis.
If follow-­
up examinations and ultrasounds do not demonstrate
concentric reduction of the hip after 3-4 weeks of Pavlik harness treatment, the harness should be abandoned. Continued use of the harness
beyond this period in a persistently dislocated hip can cause Pavlik
harness disease or wearing away of the posterior aspect of the acetabulum, which can make the ultimate reduction less stable.

Children 6 Months to 2 Years of Age

The principal goals in the treatment of late-­diagnosed dysplasia
are to obtain and maintain reduction of the hip without damaging
the femoral head. Closed reductions are performed in the operating room under general anesthesia. The hip is moved to determine
the range of motion (ROM) in which it remains reduced. This is

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4236 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

Fig. 719.12 Arthrogram of a reduced hip for evaluating the stability
of reduction.

Fig. 719.10 Photograph of a Pavlik harness.

COMPLICATIONS

Redislocation

Safe zone

Maximum abduction

Fig. 719.11 Diagram of the safe zone of Ramsey.

The most important complication of DDH is avascular necrosis of the
femoral epiphysis. Reduction of the femoral head under pressure or
in extreme abduction can result in occlusion of the epiphyseal vessels
and produce either partial or total infarction of the epiphysis. Revascularization soon follows, but if the physis is severely damaged, abnormal growth and development can occur. Management, as previously
outlined, is designed to minimize this complication. With appropriate
treatment, the incidence of avascular necrosis for DDH is reduced to
5–15%. Other complications in DDH include redislocation, residual
subluxation, acetabular dysplasia, pressure ulcers from prolonged casting, and postoperative complications, including wound infections.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

compared to the maximal ROM to construct a “safe zone” (Fig.
719.11). An arthrogram obtained at the time of reduction is very
helpful for evaluating the depth and stability of the reduction (Fig.
719.12). The reduction is maintained in a well-­molded spica cast,
with the “human position” of moderate flexion and abduction
being the preferred position. After the procedure, single-­cut CT
or MRI may be used to confirm the reduction. Twelve weeks after
closed reduction, the plaster cast is removed; an abduction orthosis
is often used at this point to encourage further remodeling of the
acetabulum. Failure to obtain a stable hip with a closed reduction
indicates the need for an open reduction. In patients younger than
18 months of age, a concomitant acetabular or femoral procedure
is rarely required. The potential for acetabular development after
closed or open reduction is excellent and continues for 4-8 years
after the procedure.

Children Older Than 2 Years

Children 2-6 years of age with a hip dislocation usually require an
open reduction. In this age-­group, a concomitant femoral shortening osteotomy is often performed to reduce the pressure on the
proximal femur and minimize the risk of osteonecrosis. Because
the potential for acetabular development is markedly diminished
in these older children, a pelvic osteotomy is usually performed in
conjunction with the open reduction. Postoperatively, patients are
immobilized in a spica cast for 6-12 weeks.

719.2 Transient Monoarticular Synovitis
(Toxic Synovitis)
Wudbhav N. Sankar, Jennifer J. Winell, B. David Horn,
and Lawrence Wells
Transient synovitis (toxic synovitis) is thought to be a reactive arthritis
and is one of the most common causes of hip pain in young children.

ETIOLOGY

The cause of transient synovitis remains unknown. It has been variously described as a nonspecific inflammatory condition or as a postviral immunologic synovitis because it tends to follow recent viral
illnesses.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Although transient synovitis can occur in all age-­groups, it is most prevalent in children between 3 and 8 years of age, with a mean onset at age 6
years. Approximately 70% of all affected children have had a nonspecific
upper respiratory tract infection the 7-14 days before symptom onset.
Symptoms often develop acutely (∼3 days) and usually consist of pain in
the groin, anterior thigh, or knee, which may be referred from the hip.
These children are usually able to bear weight on the affected limb and
typically walk with an antalgic gait with the foot externally rotated. The hip
is not held flexed, abducted, or laterally rotated unless a significant effusion
is present. They are often afebrile or have a low-­grade fever (≤38oC).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 719 u The Hip 4237
DIAGNOSIS

Transient synovitis is a diagnosis of exclusion, and laboratory and
radiographic tests can be useful to rule out other more serious conditions. In transient synovitis, infection laboratory tests (ESR: <20
mm/hr, serum CRP: normal or ≤2 mg/dL, and WBC: <12,000 cells/
mm3) are relatively normal, but on occasion a mild elevation in the
ESR is observed. AP and Lauenstein (frog-­leg) lateral radiographs of
the pelvis may be acquired and are also usually found to be normal.
Ultrasonography of the hip is the preferred imaging modality and often
demonstrates a small joint effusion.
The most important condition to exclude before confirming a diagnosis
of toxic synovitis is septic arthritis. Children with septic arthritis usually appear more systemically ill and have more pain than those with
transient synovitis, often refusing to walk or move their hip at all. High
fever, refusal to walk, and elevations of the ESR, serum CRP, and WBC
all suggest a diagnosis of septic arthritis. If the clinical scenario is suspicious for septic arthritis, an ultrasound-­guided aspiration of the hip
joint should be performed to make the definitive diagnosis (see Chapter 726). An exception to these criteria is hip septic arthritis due to Kingella kingae or Lyme disease, which may have minimal inflammation
and low-­grade or no fever. Synovial fluid white blood cell counts are
low in toxic synovitis (<25,000) and much higher in Lyme and septic
arthritis (50,00-200,000). MRI may be needed to evaluate for an associated osteomyelitis if the patient has concerning examination or laboratory findings (see Chapter 725).

TREATMENT

The treatment of transient monoarticular synovitis of the hip is symptomatic. Recommended therapies include activity limitation and relief
of weight bearing until the pain subsides. Antiinflammatory agents and
analgesics can shorten the duration of pain. Most children improve in
5-7 days and recover completely within 3-6 weeks.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

719.3 Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes Disease
Wudbhav N. Sankar, Jennifer J. Winell, B. David Horn,
and Lawrence Wells
Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease (LCPD) is a hip disorder of unknown etiology that results from temporary interruption of the blood supply to
the proximal femoral epiphysis, leading to osteonecrosis and femoral
head deformity.

ETIOLOGY

Although the underlying etiology remains obscure, most authors agree
that the final common pathway in the development of LCPD is disruption of the vascular supply to the femoral epiphysis, which results in
ischemia and osteonecrosis. Infection, trauma, and transient synovitis
have all been proposed as causative factors but are unsubstantiated.
Factors leading to thrombophilia, an increased tendency to develop
thrombosis, and a reduced ability to lyse thrombi have been identified. Factor V Leiden mutation, deficiency of proteins C and S, lupus
anticoagulant, anticardiolipin antibodies, antitrypsin, and plasminogen activator might play a role in the abnormal clotting mechanism.
These abnormalities in the clotting cascade are thought to increase
blood viscosity and the risk for venous thrombosis. Poor venous outflow leads to increased intraosseous pressure, which, in turn, impedes
arterial inflow, causing ischemia and cell death. LCPD is rarely due to
pathogenic variants in COL2A1, which is usually sporadic (de novo)
and manifests as an autosomal dominant trait.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The incidence of LCPD in the United States is 1 in 1,200 children,
with males 4-5 times more likely to be affected than females. The peak
incidence of the disease is between the ages of 4 and ­8 years. Bilateral

involvement is seen in approximately 10% of the patients, but the hips
are usually in different stages of collapse.

PATHOGENESIS

Early pathologic changes in the femoral head are the result of ischemia and necrosis; subsequent changes result from the repair process.
The disease course may have four stages, although variations have
been described. The initial stage of the disease, which lasts an average of 6 months, is characterized by synovitis, joint irritability, and
early necrosis of the femoral head. Revascularization then leads to
osteoclastic-­mediated resorption of the necrotic segment. The necrotic
bone is replaced by fibrovascular tissue rather than new bone, which
compromises the structural integrity of the femoral epiphysis. The second stage is the fragmentation stage, which typically lasts 8 months.
During this stage, the femoral epiphysis begins to collapse, usually laterally, and begins to extrude from the acetabulum. The healing stage,
which lasts approximately 4 years, begins with new bone formation in
the subchondral region. Reossification begins centrally and expands
in all directions. The degree of femoral head deformity depends on
the severity of collapse and the amount of remodeling that occurs.
The final stage is the residual stage, which begins after the entire head
has reossified. A mild amount of remodeling of the femoral head still
occurs until the child reaches skeletal maturity. LCPD often damages
the proximal femoral physis, leading to a short neck (coxa breva) and
trochanteric overgrowth.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The most common presenting symptom is a limp of varying duration.
Pain, if present, is usually activity related and may be localized in the
groin or referred to the anteromedial thigh or knee region. Failure
to recognize that thigh or knee pain in a child may be secondary to hip
pathology can cause further delay in the diagnosis. Less commonly, the
onset of the disease may be much more acute and may be associated
with a failure to ambulate.
Antalgic gait (a limp characterized by a shortening of gait phase on
the injured side to alleviate weight-­bearing pain) may be particularly
prominent after strenuous activity at the end of the day. Hip motion,
primarily internal rotation and abduction, is limited. Early in the
course of the disease, the limited abduction is secondary to synovitis and muscle spasm in the adductor group; however, with time and
the subsequent deformities that can develop, the limitation of abduction can become permanent. A mild hip flexion contracture of 10-20
degrees may be present. Atrophy of the muscles of the thigh, calf, or
buttock from disuse secondary to pain may be evident. An apparent
leg-­length inequality may be caused by an adduction contracture or
true shortening on the involved side from femoral head collapse.

DIAGNOSIS

Routine plain radiographs are the primary diagnostic tool for LCPD.
AP and Lauenstein (frog-­
leg) lateral views are used to diagnose,
stage, provide prognosis for, and follow the course of the disease (Fig.
719.13). It is important when evaluating disease progression that all
radiographs be viewed sequentially and compared with previous
radiographs to assess the stage of the disease and to determine the true
extent of epiphyseal involvement.
In the initial stage of LCPD, the radiographic changes include a
decreased size of the ossification center, lateralization of the femoral
head with widening of the medial joint space, a subchondral fracture,
and physeal irregularity. In the fragmentation stage, the epiphysis
appears fragmented, and there are scattered areas of increased radiolucency and radiodensity. During the reossification stage, the bone
density returns to normal via new (woven) bone formation. The residual stage is marked by the reossification of the femoral head, gradual
remodeling of head shape until skeletal maturity, and remodeling of
the acetabulum.
In addition to these radiographic changes, several classic radiographic signs have been reported that describe a “head at risk” for
severe deformity. Lateral extrusion of the epiphysis, a horizontal physis, calcification lateral to the epiphysis, subluxation of the hip, and a

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4238 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

E
B

C

A

D

F

Fig. 719.13 Radiographic evolution of Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease, with onset in a male at 10-­yr, 11-­mo of age. Despite the late age of onset,
the femoral head remodels well as the patient approaches skeletal maturity. A, Anteroposterior (AP) radiograph obtained at onset of the disorder
shows increased density in the femoral head and apparent widening of the joint space (Waldenström’s initial stage). B, AP radiograph obtained 9 mo
after onset shows the head entering the fragmentation stage. The central fragment remains dense and has collapsed relative to the lateral portion
(lateral pillar) of the femoral head. The lateral pillar is lucent but has not collapsed, and the hip is classified as group B in the lateral pillar classification system. The joint space has widened further. C, AP radiograph obtained 17 mo after onset shows early reossification of the femoral head (the
healing stage). D, A closer view of the femoral head at 22 mo after onset of disease. There is still widening of the joint space, and the acetabulum
has a bicompartmental appearance. E, AP radiograph obtained 4 yr after onset. The femoral head is healed and in the residual state. There is still
widening of the joint space and incongruity of the head with the acetabulum. F, AP radiograph obtained 6 yr after onset shows improved roundness of the femoral head and better joint congruity. (From Kim HK, Herring JA. Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease. In: Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s Pediatric
Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 14.19.)

radiolucent horizontal V in the lateral aspect of the physis (Gage’s sign)
are all associated with a poor prognosis.
In the absence of changes on plain radiographs, particularly in the
early stages of the disease, MRI is useful to diagnose early infarction and determine the degree of impaired perfusion. It is being
used more in early stages to help determine prognosis. During the
remodeling or residual stages, MRI is extremely helpful to define
the abnormal anatomy and determine the extent of intraarticular
injury. Arthrography can be useful to dynamically assess the shape
of the femoral head, demonstrate whether a hip can be contained,
and diagnose hinge abduction. Table 719.1 outlines the differential
diagnosis.

CLASSIFICATION

A four-­group classification is based on the amount of femoral
epiphysis involvement and a set of radiographic “head at-­risk”
signs. Group I hips have anterior femoral head involvement of
25%, no sequestrum (an island of dead bone within the epiphysis),
and no metaphyseal abnormalities. Group II hips have up to 50%
involvement and a clear demarcation between involved and uninvolved segments. Metaphyseal cysts may be present. Group III hips
display up to 75% involvement and a large sequestrum. In group
IV, the entire femoral head is involved. Use of this classification
system has been limited because of a high degree of interobserver
variability.
The Herring lateral pillar classification is the most widely used
radiographic classification system for determining treatment and
prognosis during the active stage of the disease (Fig. 719.14). The
Herring classification has a high degree of interobserver reliability. Classification is based on several radiographs taken during the
early fragmentation stage. The lateral pillar classification system
for LCPD evaluates the shape of the femoral head epiphysis on AP
radiograph of the hip. The head is divided into three sections or pillars. The lateral pillar occupies the lateral 15–30% of the head width,
the central pillar is approximately 50% of the head width, and the
medial pillar is 20–35% of the head width. The degree of involvement of the lateral pillar can be subdivided into three groups. In
group A, the lateral pillar is radiographically normal. In group B,
the lateral pillar has some lucency, but >50% of the lateral pillar
height is maintained. In group C, the lateral pillar is more lucent
than in group B, and <50% of the pillar height remains. Herring has

Table 719.1  Differential Diagnosis of Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes
Disease
OTHER CAUSES OF AVASCULAR NECROSIS
Sickle cell disease
Other hemoglobinopathies (e.g., thalassemia)
Chronic myelogenous leukemia
Steroid medication
Sequela of traumatic hip dislocation
Treatment of developmental dysplasia of the hip
Septic arthritis
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS MIMICKING PERTHES
Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia
Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia
Mucopolysaccharidoses
Hypothyroidism
OTHER SYNDROMES
Osteochondromatosis
Metachondromatosis
Schwartz-­Jampel syndrome
Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome
Maroteaux-­Lamy syndrome
Martsolf syndrome
Stickler syndrome
From Kim HKW, Herring JA. Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease. In: Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s
Pediatric Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Box 14.6, p. 561.

added a B/C border group to the classification system to describe
patients with approximately 50% collapse of the lateral pillar.

NATURAL HISTORY AND PROGNOSIS

Children who develop signs and symptoms of LCPD before the age
of 6 years tend to recover with fewer residual problems. Patients
older than 9 years of age at presentation usually have a poor prognosis. The reason for this difference is that the remodeling potential
of the femoral head is higher in younger children. Greater extent of
femoral head involvement and duration of the disease process are
additional factors associated with a poor prognosis. Hips classified
as Catterall groups III and IV and lateral pillar group C generally
have a poor prognosis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 719 u The Hip 4239

100%
maintained

A

>50%

B

<50%

Approx 50%

B/C Border

C

Fig. 719.14 Lateral pillar classification for Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease. A, There is no involvement of the lateral pillar. B, More than 50% of the
lateral pillar height is maintained. B/C Border, Lateral pillar is narrowed or poorly ossified with approximately 50% height maintained. C, Less than
50% of the lateral pillar height is maintained.

TREATMENT

The goal of treatment in LCPD is preservation of a spherical, well-­
covered femoral head and maintenance of hip ROM that is close
to normal. Although the treatment of LCPD remains controversial, most authors agree that the general approach to these patients
should be guided by the principle of containment. This principle
is predicated on the fact that while the femoral head is fragmenting, and therefore in a softened condition, it is best to contain it
entirely within the acetabulum; by doing so, the acetabulum acts
as a mold for the regenerating femoral head. Conversely, failure
to contain the head permits it to deform, with resulting extrusion
and impingement on the lateral edge of the acetabulum. To be successful, containment must be instituted early while the femoral
head is still moldable; once the head has healed, repositioning the
femoral epiphysis will not aid remodeling and can, in fact, worsen
symptoms.
Initial options to manage symptoms include activity limitation,
protected weight bearing, and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory medications. Nonoperative containment can be achieved by using a Petrie cast to restore abduction and to direct the femoral head deeper
into the acetabulum. Petrie casts are two long-­leg casts that are connected by a bar and can be helpful to keep the hips in abduction
and internal rotation (the best position for containment). Casting is
generally done in conjunction with an arthrogram to confirm containment and a tenotomy of the adductor tendons. After 6 weeks,
patients can be transitioned into an abduction orthosis with limited
weight bearing. Several older studies did not support the efficacy
of casting and long-­term bracing as a means of containment, but a
subsequent large series reported excellent results with this form of
treatment.
Surgical containment may be approached from the femoral side, the
acetabular side, or both sides of the hip joint. A varus osteotomy of
the proximal femur is the most common procedure. Pelvic osteotomies in LCPD are divided into three categories: acetabular rotational
osteotomies, shelf procedures, and medial displacement or Chiari osteotomies. Any of these procedures can be combined with a proximal
femoral varus osteotomy when severe deformity of the femoral head
cannot be contained by a pelvic osteotomy alone.
After healing of the epiphysis, surgical treatment shifts from containment to management of the residual deformity. Patients with hinge
abduction or joint incongruity might benefit from a valgus-­producing
proximal femoral osteotomy. Coxa breva and overgrowth of the greater
trochanter can be managed by performing an advancement of the
trochanter. This helps restore the length-­tension relationship of the
abductor mechanism and can alleviate abductor fatigue. Patients with
femoroacetabular impingement from irregularity of the femoral head
often can be helped with an osteoplasty or cheilectomy of the offending
prominence.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

719.4 Slipped Capital Femoral Epiphysis
Wudbhav N. Sankar, Jennifer J. Winell, B. David Horn,
and Lawrence Wells
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis (SCFE) is a hip disorder that affects
adolescents, most often between 10-16 years of age, and involves failure
of the physis and displacement of the femoral head relative to the neck.

CLASSIFICATION

SCFEs may be classified temporally, according to onset of symptoms
(acute, chronic, acute-­
on-­
chronic); functionally, according to the
patient’s ability to bear weight (stable or unstable); or morphologically,
as the extent of displacement of the femoral epiphysis relative to the
neck (mild, moderate, or severe), as estimated by measurement on
radiographic or CT images.
An acute SCFE is characterized as one occurring in a patient who
has prodromal symptoms for ≤3 weeks and should be distinguished
from a purely traumatic separation of the epiphysis in a previously
normal hip (a true Salter-­Harris type I fracture; see Chapter 724).
The patient with an acute slip usually has some prodromal pain in the
groin, thigh, or knee, and usually reports a relatively minor injury (a
twist or fall) that is not sufficiently violent to produce an acute fracture of this severity.
Chronic SCFE is the most common form of presentation. Typically,
an adolescent presents with a few months’ history of vague groin, thigh,
or knee pain and a limp. Radiographs show a variable amount of posterior and inferior migration of the femoral epiphysis and remodeling of
the femoral neck in the same direction.
Children with acute-­on-­chronic SCFE can have features of both
acute and chronic conditions. Prodromal symptoms have been present
for >3 weeks with a sudden exacerbation of pain. Radiographs demonstrate femoral neck remodeling and further displacement of the capital
epiphysis beyond the remodeled point of the femoral neck.
The stability classification separates patients based on their ability
to ambulate and is more useful in predicting prognosis and establishing a treatment plan. The SCFE is considered stable when the
child is able to walk with or without crutches. A child with an unstable SCFE is unable to walk with or without walking aids. Patients
with unstable SCFE have a much higher prevalence of osteonecrosis
(up to 50%) compared to those with stable SCFE (nearly 0%). This
is most likely because of the vascular injury caused at the time of
initial displacement.
SCFE may also be categorized by the degree of displacement of
the epiphysis on the femoral neck. The head-­shaft angle difference
is <30 degrees in mild slips, between 30 and 60 degrees in moderate slips, and >60 degrees in severe slips, compared to the normal
contralateral side.
SCFE is one of many etiologies of acquired coxa vara
defined by an abnormal decrease in the femoral neck shaft angle
(Table 719.2).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4240 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 719.2  Classification of Coxa Vara
ACQUIRED COXA VARA
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis
Sequela of avascular necrosis of the femoral epiphysis
Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease
Traumatic coxa vara
Femoral neck fracture
Traumatic hip dislocation
Sequela of reduction for developmental dysplasia of the hip
Septic necrosis
Other causes of avascular necrosis of the immature femoral head
Coxa vara associated with pathologic bone disorders
Osteogenesis imperfecta
Fibrous dysplasia
Renal osteodystrophy
Osteopetrosis
Other bone-­softening conditions affecting the femoral neck
Congenital femoral deficiency with coxa vara
DEVELOPMENTAL COXA VARA
Isolated (may be bilateral)
Associated with a skeletal dysplasia
Cleidocranial dysostosis
Metaphyseal dysostosis
Other skeletal dysplasias
From Sucato DJ. Congenital coxa vara. In: Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s Pediatric
Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Box 16.1, p. 617.

ETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

SCFEs are most likely caused by a combination of mechanical and
endocrine factors. The plane of cleavage in most SCFEs occurs through
the hypertrophic zone of the physis. During normal puberty, the
physis becomes more vertically oriented, which converts mechanical
forces from compression to shear. In addition, the hypertrophic zone
becomes elongated in pubertal adolescents due to high levels of circulating hormones. This widening of the physis decreases the threshold for mechanical failure. Normal ossification depends on a number
of different factors, including the thyroid hormone, vitamin D, and
calcium. Consequently, it is not surprising that SCFEs occur with
increased incidence in children with medical disorders, such as hypothyroidism, hypopituitarism, and renal osteodystrophy. Obesity, one
of the largest risk factors for SCFE, affects both the mechanical load
on the physis and the level of circulating hormones. The combination
of mechanical and endocrine factors results in gradual failure of the
physis, which allows posterior and inferior displacement of the head in
relation to the femoral neck.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The annual incidence of SCFE is 2 per 100,000 in the general population. Obesity is the most closely associated risk factor in the development of SCFE; approximately 65% of the patients are in the >90th
percentile in weight-­for-­age profiles. There is a predilection for males
to be affected more often than females and for the left hip to be affected
more often than the right. Bilateral involvement has been reported in as
many as 60% of cases, nearly half of which may be present at the time
of initial presentation.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The classic patient presenting with a SCFE is an obese male between
the ages of 11 and 16 years. Females present earlier, usually between
10 and 14 years of age. Patients with chronic and stable SCFEs tend
to present after weeks to months of symptoms. Patients usually
limp to some degree and have an externally rotated lower extremity. Physical examination of the affected hip reveals a restriction of
internal rotation, abduction, and flexion. Commonly, the examiner
notes that as the affected hip is flexed, the thigh tends to rotate progressively into more external rotation with increased flexion (Fig.
719.15). Most patients complain of groin symptoms, but isolated

Fig. 719.15 Clinical examination of a patient with a stable slipped

capital femoral epiphysis. Hip flexion and external rotation are limited.
With flexion of the affected hip, the limb rotates externally. (From Podesczwa D. Slipped capital femoral epiphysis. In: Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s Pediatric Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022:
Fig.15.5.)

thigh or knee pain is a common presentation from referred pain
along the course of the obturator nerve. Missed or delayed diagnosis often occurs in children who present with knee pain and do
not receive appropriate imaging of the hip. Patients with unstable
SCFEs usually present in an urgent fashion. Children typically
refuse to allow any ROM of the hip; much like a hip fracture, the
extremity is shortened, abducted, and externally rotated.

DIAGNOSTIC STUDIES

AP and frog-­leg lateral radiographic views of both hips are usually the only imaging studies needed to make the diagnosis. Because
approximately 25% of patients have a contralateral slip on initial
presentation, it is critical that both hips be carefully evaluated by
the treating physician. Radiographic findings include widening and
irregularity of the physis, a decrease in epiphyseal height in the center of the acetabulum, a crescent-­shaped area of increased density
in the proximal portion of the femoral neck, and the “blanch sign of
Steel” corresponding to the double density created from the anteriorly displaced femoral neck overlying the femoral head. In an unaffected patient, Klein’s line, a straight line drawn along the superior
cortex of the femoral neck on the AP radiograph, should intersect
some portion of the lateral capital femoral epiphysis. With progressive displacement of the epiphysis, Klein’s line no longer intersects
the epiphysis (Fig. 719.16). Although some of these radiographic
findings can be subtle, most diagnoses can be readily made on the
frog-­leg lateral view, which reveals the characteristic posterior and
inferior displacement of the epiphysis in relation to the femoral
neck (Fig. 719.17).

TREATMENT

Once the diagnosis is made, the patient should be admitted to the hospital immediately and placed on bed rest. Allowing the child to go home
without definitive treatment increases the risk that a stable SCFE will
become an unstable SCFE and that further displacement will occur.
Children with atypical presentations (younger than 10 years of age, thin
body habitus) should have screening labs sent to rule out an underlying
endocrinopathy.
The goal of treatment is to prevent further progression of the
slip and to stabilize (i.e., close) the physis. Although various forms
of treatment have been used in the past, including spica casting,
the current gold standard for the treatment of SCFE is in situ pinning with a single large screw (Fig. 719.18). The term in situ implies
that no attempt is made to reduce the displacement between the
epiphysis and femoral neck because doing so increases the risk of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 719 u The Hip 4241
osteonecrosis. Screws are typically placed percutaneously under
fluoroscopic guidance. Postoperatively, most patients are allowed
partial weight bearing with crutches for 4-6 weeks, followed by a
gradual return to normal activities. Patients should be monitored
with serial radiographs to be sure that the physis is closing and that
the slip is stable. After healing from the initial stabilization, patients
with severe residual deformity may be candidates for proximal femoral osteotomy to correct the deformity, reduce impingement, and
improve range of motion.
Because 20–40% of children will develop a contralateral SCFE at
some point, many orthopedists advocate prophylactic pin fixation of
the contralateral (normal) side in patients with a unilateral SCFE. The
benefits of preventing a possible slip must be balanced with the risks of
performing a potentially unnecessary surgery. Several recent studies
have attempted to analyze decision models for prophylactic pinning,
but controversy remains regarding the optimal course of treatment. If

Right

Left

Normal
Klein’s line

prophylactic pinning is not performed, patients and their families must
be instructed to return immediately if they develop contralateral hip
or leg pain.

COMPLICATIONS

Osteonecrosis and chondrolysis are the two most serious complications of SCFE. Osteonecrosis, or avascular necrosis, usually occurs as a
result of injury to the retinacular vessels. This can be caused by an initial force of injury, particularly in unstable slips, forced manipulation of
an acute or unstable SCFE, compression from intracapsular hematoma,
or as a direct injury during surgery. Partial forms of osteonecrosis can
also appear after internal fixation; this can be caused by a disruption of
the intraepiphyseal blood vessels. Chondrolysis, on the other hand, is
an acute dissolution of articular cartilage in the hip. There are no clear
causes of this complication, but it is thought to be associated with more
severe slips, to occur more commonly in females, and to be associated
with pins or screws protruding out of the femoral head.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Abnormal
Klein’s line

A

B

Fig. 719.18 Preoperative (A) and postoperative (B) radiographs demFig. 719.16 Illustration of Klein’s line.

A

B

onstrating the in situ pinning in a case of slipped capital femoral epiphysis.

C

Fig. 719.17 Radiographic appearance of slipped capital femoral epiphysis (SCFE) on presentation. A, Appearance of acute SCFE on a frog-­leg

lateral view. The displacement of the epiphysis is suggestive of a Salter-­Harris type I fracture of the upper femoral physis. There are no secondary
adaptive changes noted in the femoral neck. B, Frog-­leg lateral radiographs in a patient with many months of thigh discomfort and a chronic slipped
epiphysis. Adaptive changes in the femoral neck predominate, and the epiphysis is centered on the adapted femoral neck. C, Frog-­leg lateral radiographs of a patient with acute-­on-­chronic SCFE. The patient had several months of vague thigh pain, with sudden, severe exacerbation of that
pain. The acute displacement of the epiphysis is evident. Unlike in acute SCFE (see A), secondary adaptive remodeling changes are also present
in the femoral neck, beyond which the epiphysis has acutely displaced. (From Podeszwa D. Slipped capital femoral epiphysis. In: Herring JA, ed.
Tachdjian’s Pediatric Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 15.1, p. 583.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4242 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

Chapter 720

The Spine
R. Justin Mistovich, Keith D. Baldwin, and
David A. Spiegel
Abnormalities of the spine can result from a variety of causes, including congenital, developmental, and traumatic. In addition to spinal
deformities, back pain is also prevalent in children and adolescents and
may be caused by a number of serious or relatively benign pathologies.

NORMAL SPINAL CURVATURES

A normal spinal column is straight in the anteroposterior (AP, coronal)
plane but has curvatures in the lateral (sagittal) plane. Normal cervical lordosis, thoracic kyphosis, and lumbar lordosis regions are biomechanically advantageous as they maintain relationships of the body
relative to the forces of gravity, which is important for balance. These
curvatures also help to conserve energy by minimizing the amount of
muscular activity required to maintain an upright posture.
Abnormalities affecting these normal curvatures, termed sagittal
plane imbalances, can be measured on a lateral spine radiograph.
A vertical line, or plumb line, drawn from the center of the seventh
cervical vertebra should normally fall through the posterosuperior
corner of the sacrum. Disorders affecting sagittal alignment include
thoracic hyperkyphosis and lumbar hyperlordosis. In contrast,
although scoliosis is actually a three-­dimensional deformity not limited to a single anatomic plane, it is most commonly described as a
frontal or coronal plane deformity with curvatures away from the
midline in this plane.

OVERVIEW OF ABNORMAL SPINAL CURVATURES

The most common spinal deformities are scoliosis and kyphosis. Early
diagnosis is important, as a subset of patients may be candidates for
early interventions to prevent curve progression. Bracing has been
proven to reduce the number of patients with curve progressing to
require surgery in adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS).
Scoliosis may be idiopathic, due to congenital bony deformities,
or may be associated with a variety of underlying conditions, including neuromuscular diseases, connective tissue diseases, or genetic
syndromes. Oftentimes, the pediatrician is the first to diagnose these
conditions.
Although parents and families are often most concerned about
potential cosmetic abnormalities, the physician diagnosing a patient
with a spinal deformity must carefully consider both the potential for
underlying causes requiring treatment and the patient’s long-­term
prognosis. Progressive curvatures in the neuromuscular population
may result in respiratory insufficiency in addition to a loss of sitting
balance. Other conditions such as neurofibromatosis are associated
with a specific dystrophic curve pattern that can rapidly progress.
Sometimes, a spinal deformity might be the first sign of an underlying syndrome. Parents and the patient need an understanding of the
deformity, how it may progress, and potential complications associated
with the diagnosis. A classification of common spinal abnormalities is
presented in Table 720.1.

causing a visible prominence to be noted on the Adams forward bend
test. The sagittal plane is also affected, leading to abnormalities such as
decreased thoracic kyphosis.

ETIOLOGY

By definition, the etiology of idiopathic scoliosis remains unknown
despite a considerable body of research. It is likely that the disease
is multifactorial, with genetic, hormonal, cellular, and anatomic
contributions.
A genetic link has been proposed with sex-­linked dominant, autosomal dominant, and polygenetic inheritance patterns all suggested.
Genetic involvement has been substantiated in studies of twins, demonstrating a 73% concordance rate for AIS in monozygotic twins compared to a 36% concordance rate in dizygotic twins.
AIS is 2 to 10 times more common in females than males. Investigators have attempted to explain this difference as a genetic effect: it
has been hypothesized that males are not as susceptible to the involved
genes as females. Therefore, affected males must inherit a larger number of susceptibility genes to have a scoliosis phenotype. Males would
pass more susceptibility genes onto their children and would therefore
have more affected children. Fathers with AIS transmit the gene to 80%
of their children, but mothers with AIS transmit it to only 56% of their
children.
Exome sequencing has identified pathogenic variants in the
COL11A2 collagen gene in 32% of AIS cases. COMP promotor methylation has been correlated with a younger age and larger main curve
magnitude. Other gene variants have been found to demonstrate an
association with AIS, including PAX1, POC5, the Bsml polymorphism
in the vitamin D receptor gene, and FBN1. Additionally, females who
have first-­degree relatives with AIS have been found to have more
severe curves and longer arm spans than females who have a spontaneous case.
Cellular structures may be involved in the disease process. Calmodulin, a regulator of the contractile properties of muscle, occurs at
increased levels in the platelets of patients with progressive AIS. On
a more cellular level, differences in the mRNA expression of H19 and
ADIPOQ have been described in the paraspinal musculature from the
concave to the convex side of a curvature. Other functional evaluations
of patients with AIS have noted abnormalities in proprioception and
postural balance.
MRI studies of the brain in patients with AIS versus controls have
found that the cerebellum of affected patients is hypertrophied in areas
involving the somatosensory tracts, motor control, and response to
visual stimulation. These areas of hypertrophy may be a compensation
for impaired balance resulting from malalignment of the spine.
Approximately 30% of females with AIS have osteopenia on DEXA
studies, and of these, 80% will have lifelong osteopenia. Osteopenia has
been linked to an increased risk of curve progression. Insufficient vitamin D levels have been reported in over 90% of patients with operative
AIS.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Idiopathic scoliosis is the most common type of spinal curvature; 80%
of cases are idiopathic. The overall prevalence of idiopathic scoliosis in
skeletally immature patients ranges from 1–3% of the population. Most
curves are mild and do not require treatment, with only 0.5% being >20
degrees and 0.3% exceeding 30 degrees. Curves of ≤10 degrees occur
equally between males and females; however, those requiring an intervention occur in a 7:1 female-­to-­male ratio.

CLASSIFICATION OF IDIOPATHIC SCOLIOSIS

720.1 Idiopathic Scoliosis
R. Justin Mistovich, Keith D. Baldwin, and
David A. Spiegel
Scoliosis is a complex, three-­dimensional spinal deformity, defined in
the coronal plane as a curve of at least 10 degrees on a posteroanterior
(PA) radiograph of the spine. Affected vertebrae are axially rotated,

Idiopathic scoliosis is classified according to the age at onset. Patients
with curves that are present before age 8-10 years have early-­onset scoliosis (EOS). Although EOS can have several etiologies, young patients
without a clearly identified cause are classified as having idiopathic
EOS. The subgroup of infantile idiopathic EOS refers to patients diagnosed before age 3 years and accounts for only 0.5–4% of cases of AIS.
AIS affects patients 10 years of age and older and comprises 70–80% of
all cases of idiopathic scoliosis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 720 u The Spine

4243

Table 720.1  Classification of Spinal Deformities
SCOLIOSIS
Idiopathic
Infantile
Juvenile
Adolescent
Congenital
Failure of formation
Wedge vertebrae
Hemivertebrae
Failure of segmentation
Unilateral bar
Block vertebra
Mixed
Neuromuscular
Neuropathic diseases
Upper motor neuron
Cerebral palsy
Spinocerebellar degeneration (Friedreich ataxia, Charcot-­Marie-­
Tooth disease)
Syringomyelia
Spinal cord tumor
Spinal cord trauma
Lower motor neuron
Poliomyelitis
Spinal muscular atrophy

A

B

Myopathies
Duchenne muscular dystrophy
Arthrogryposis
Other muscular dystrophies

C

D

Syndromes
Neurofibromatosis
Marfan syndrome
Compensatory
Leg-­length discrepancy
KYPHOSIS
Postural kyphosis (flexible)
Scheuermann disease
Congenital kyphosis
Failure of formation
Failure of segmentation
Mixed
Adapted from the Terminology Committee, Scoliosis Research Society. A glossary of
scoliosis terms. Spine. 1976;1:57.

CLINICAL PRESENTATION OF IDIOPATHIC
SCOLIOSIS

When evaluating a patient with a structural spinal curvature, a thorough history and physical examination are required because idiopathic
scoliosis is a diagnosis of exclusion. All other potential causes, including congenital bone malformations, neuromuscular and syndromic
diseases, and tumors must systematically be excluded.
The curvature is frequently found on a positive screening by primary care physicians, through a school screening program, or because
patients (or their family or friends) have noticed a cosmetic deformity.
Citing the need for early identification of scoliosis to reduce the risk of
operative complications with correction of large, neglected curves, the
Scoliosis Research Society advocates for school screening. The BrAIST study, which definitively demonstrated that patients treated with
Boston braces for 18 hours a day have a significantly lower incidence of
curves progressing to the surgical range, supports the potential value
of early detection through screening programs. Although the United
States Preventive Services Task Force previously recommended against
school screening programs, their updated 2018 recommendation statement concluded that evidence was insufficient to recommend for or
against screening.

Fig. 720.1 Structural changes in idiopathic scoliosis. A, As curvature

increases, alterations in body configuration develop in both the primary
and compensatory curve regions. B, Asymmetry of shoulder height,
waistline, and elbow-­to-­flank distance are common findings. C, Vertebral rotation and associated posterior displacement of the ribs on the
convex side of the curve are responsible for the characteristic deformity
of the chest wall (rib hump) in scoliosis patients. D, In the school screening examination for scoliosis, the patient bends forward at the waist.
Rib asymmetry of even a small degree is obvious. (From Scoles PV. Spinal deformity in childhood and adolescence. In: Behrman RE, Vaughn
VC III, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics, update 5. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders; 1989.)

Back pain is not commonly a primary presenting complaint of
patients with scoliosis, though when questioned, at least 30% of adolescents with idiopathic scoliosis will report some degree of back discomfort at some point in time. To keep this finding in perspective, a
similar number of healthy adolescents complain of episodes of low
back pain and discomfort. If a child presents with back pain associated
with a curvature, it is important to do a careful history and physical
exam, check spine radiographs, and rule out any diagnostic red flags
(see Chapter 720.5). Look for other causes of pain in these patients,
including spondylosis, spondylolisthesis, tethered cord, syrinx, herniated disk, or tumor such as osteoid osteoma or spinal cord tumor.

PHYSICAL EXAMINATION OF IDIOPATHIC
SCOLIOSIS

Evaluate the patient in the standing position, from both the front
and the side, to identify any asymmetry in the chest wall, trunk, or
shoulders.
Begin the examination focusing on the back. The earliest abnormality noted on physical exam in patients with scoliosis is asymmetry
of the posterior chest wall on forward bending. This test, called the
Adams forward-­bending test (Fig. 720.1), is performed by observing
the patient’s back while he or she is bending 45 degrees forward. This
test can also be augmented with a scoliometer placed at the apex of
the deformity. An inclination measuring 7 degrees or more has been
suggested as the cutoff for orthopedic referral. Scoliosis is a three-­
dimensional deformity; patients develop a posterior rib hump on the
convex side of the spinal curve as a result of the rotational component
of the deformity. The anterior chest wall may be prominent on the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4244 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
concavity of the curve due to outward rib rotation. Other associated
findings may include shoulder imbalance, a lateral shift of the trunk,
or an apparent leg-­length discrepancy due to pelvic obliquity. A primary limb length discrepancy may also present as a lumbar spinal
deformity. This lumbar curvature is compensatory and flexible, with
the apex toward the shorter leg.
Next, examine the patient from the side to evaluate the degree
of kyphosis and lordosis. The upper thoracic spine normally has a
smooth, gently rounded kyphotic curve with an apex in the midthoracic region. The cervical spine and lower lumbar spine have concave,
or lordotic curves. The magnitude of these sagittal contours varies with
age. Children have less cervical lordosis and more lumbar lordosis than
do adults or adolescents. When examining a patient with idiopathic
scoliosis, a common finding is a loss of the normal thoracic kyphosis,
resulting in what is called a relative thoracic lordosis or hypokyphosis.
Another common, benign finding in normal adolescent thoracic
spines not associated with scoliosis is a flexible round back, or postural
kyphosis. This can be corrected voluntarily when the patient extends
his or her spine. This is different from sharp, abrupt, or accentuated
forward angulation in the thoracic or thoracolumbar region, which is
indicative of a pathologic kyphotic deformity.
The final exam component is a careful neurologic examination
because scoliosis may be associated with an underlying neurologic
diagnosis. Check superficial abdominal reflexes, extremity deep tendon reflexes, muscle strength, and atrophy and examine for clonus.
Also, remember to examine the patient’s feet because a cavovarus foot
can be associated with a tethered cord. A high suspicion is necessary
in patients with infantile and juvenile idiopathic scoliosis because up
to 25% have an associated intraspinal abnormality such as a tethered
spinal cord or syringomyelia. The index of suspicion for neurologic
involvement is further raised in the presence of back pain or neurologic
symptoms, bowel or bladder symptoms, café-­au-­lait spots, a sacral
dimple, midline cutaneous abnormalities such as a hair patch or skin
tag, unilateral foot deformity, or an atypical curve pattern.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION OF IDIOPATHIC
SCOLIOSIS

Standing, high-­quality PA and lateral radiographs of the entire spine are
recommended at the initial evaluation for patients with clinical findings suggestive of a spinal deformity. Many children’s hospitals have
low-­dose stereoradiographic imaging systems rather than conventional
radiographs, which can minimize radiation exposure and also provide
three-­dimensional reconstructions of spinal deformity. On the PA
radiograph, the degree of curvature is determined by the Cobb angle,
in which the angle between the superior and inferior vertebrae most
tilted into the curve is measured (Fig. 720.2).
Although the indications for performing an MRI are variable, it is
helpful when an underlying cause for scoliosis such as a spinal cord
abnormality is being considered. Patients with early-­onset scoliosis
have a higher incidence of associated cord anomalies. Other considerations include abnormal findings on the history or physical examination and atypical radiographic features, including abnormal curve
patterns. Atypical radiographic findings include curve patterns such as
a left thoracic curve, double thoracic curves, or high thoracic curves.
Other radiographic abnormalities include widening of the spinal canal
and erosive or dysplastic changes in the vertebral body or ribs. On
the lateral radiograph, an increase in thoracic kyphosis or an absence
of segmental lordosis may be suggestive of an underlying neurologic
abnormality.

NATURAL HISTORY OF IDIOPATHIC SCOLIOSIS

Treatment decisions are based on the natural history of idiopathic
scoliosis. Infantile idiopathic early-­onset scoliosis may spontaneously
resolve in 20–90% of cases. Patients with infantile scoliosis who have
cognitive disabilities, curves presenting after 1 year of age, and larger
magnitude curves are more likely to progress. A radiographic parameter called the Mehta angle can also be used to predict curve progression in infantile scoliosis. This measurement examines the vertebra at
the apex of the thoracic curve. It measures the angle formed by a line

32°

55°

38°

A

C

B

Fig. 720.2 A-­C, Cobb angles measurements. (From Morrissey RT,

Weinstein SL, eds. Lovell and Winter’s Pediatric Orthopaedics, 3rd ed.
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1990.)

b
a

Fig. 720.3 Measuring the rib-­vertebra angle difference (RVAD). A

line is drawn perpendicular to the inferior end plate of the apical thoracic vertebra. Another line is drawn between two points that bisect
the head and neck of the rib articulating with the apex. The angle
between the perpendicular line (a) and the rib line (b) is measured.
The same procedure is repeated for the rib on the opposite side. The
concave–convex side angles are equal to the RVAD. (Modified from
Mehta MH. The rib-­vertebra angle in the early diagnosis between
resolving and progressive infantile scoliosis. J Bone Joint Surg Br.
1972;54[2]:230–243.)

perpendicular from the vertebral end plate and a line down the center
of the rib. The measurement is calculated on the convex and concave
side, and the final rib vertebral angle difference (RVAD) is calculated
by subtracting the convex side from the concave side (Fig. 720.3). A
curve with an RVAD <20 degrees will resolve in about 80% of cases,
whereas one with an RVAD >20 degrees will progress in over 80% of
cases. Curves that resolve typically do so before 2 years of age.
Several factors affect the rate of curve progression in patients with
AIS. Curves are more likely to progress in more skeletally immature
patients with significant growth remaining. Findings associated with
significant growth remaining are younger age, premenarchal status,
Tanner stage I or II, Risser sign (a radiographic measurement of ossification of the iliac crest) of 0 or 1, and Sanders Maturity Scale values
of 1-4. The Sanders Skeletal Maturity Staging System examines skeletal
maturity using a single PA radiograph of the left hand and associates
this value with current curve magnitude. Patients are staged from S1-­
S8, with S1 being the most immature and S8 indicating early maturity.
Higher magnitude curves in more skeletally immature patients are
more likely to progress.
Other factors affecting curve progression are the current curve magnitude, curve pattern, and patient sex. Three-­dimensional spinal measurements of vertebral wedging, axial rotation, and torsion have been
correlated to curve progression. In general, female patients are more
likely than males to have curves that progress. Younger, premenarchal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 720 u The Spine
females with curves between 20 and 30 degrees have a significantly
higher risk of progression than do females 2 years after menarche with
similar curves, demonstrating the significance of age on progression. In
fact, the older group is unlikely to have any progression at all whereas
premenarchal females with the same curve are likely to progress. Thoracic curves <30 degrees rarely progress after skeletal maturity, while
those >45 degrees may progress approximately 1-2 degrees annually
past skeletal maturity, and surgical stabilization is commonly offered.
Functionally, there are not many significant, clinically detrimental
effects of smaller curves. There is conflicting literature regarding the
exact curve magnitude and curve morphology in idiopathic thoracic
scoliosis that leads to cardiopulmonary impairment. Thoracic curves
of 50-70 degrees and greater have been associated with pulmonary
impairment, although magnitude of curve alone cannot fully predict
pulmonary function. Exercise capacity indicators, including heart rate,
peak oxygen intake, and work rate, were not affected by thoracic curve
magnitude, while FEV1 was influenced in a prospective study of AIS
patients. Factors such as thoracic kyphosis, curve stiffness, location of
curve apex, and degree of vertebral rotation may also impact pulmonary function. Surgical correction is correlated with improved total
lung capacity in patients with severe restrictive pulmonary function
preoperatively.
Long-­term studies have demonstrated that back pain is common
in patients with scoliosis, although there is no definitive connection
between pain and the curve magnitude or location. Furthermore,
nearly 70% of patients with pain reported low or moderate severity of symptoms, stating that the pain does not interfere with normal
activities.

TREATMENT OF IDIOPATHIC SCOLIOSIS

Treatment options include observation for small curves, bracing, and
surgical care. Vitamin D deficiency is common in patients with adolescent idiopathic scoliosis, so evaluation and supplementation if appropriate should be considered. Brace treatment decreases the incidence of
curve progression. The BrAIST study, examining the effect of Boston
braces in patients treated for 18 hours a day, was stopped before study
completion because the benefits of bracing became so clear that it was
unethical to continue patients in the nonbraced control arm of the
study. Treatment success (preventing curve progression to 50 degrees)
in the bracing group was 72%, whereas only 48% of those patients
observed without bracing avoided progression to the surgical range.
Other types of bracing have also been used, including the Providence
night bending brace and the Rigo Chêneau Brace. When discussing
bracing with families, is important to understand that bracing in AIS
does not lead to curve resolution or other measures of decreased magnitude but rather limits further progression. Additionally, while ∼30%
of patients who are braced will still require surgery, this does not necessarily mean that bracing was unsuccessful: without a brace, the curve
may have progressed more rapidly or to an even higher magnitude,
potentially requiring either an earlier surgery or more extensive fusion.
The bracing success rate depends on the amount of growth remaining. For example, patients with infantile or juvenile scoliosis are much
more likely to require a surgical procedure than those with adolescent
scoliosis and limited remaining growth. Patients at Risser 0 who are
very skeletally immature are at a higher risk of surgery even if they are
braced. It is recommended that these skeletally immature patients with
curves that are otherwise thought of as small magnitude (>30 degrees)
should be braced full time for a minimum of 18 hours daily. In addition to the effect of skeletal maturity, adherence with the recommended
protocol for wearing the brace will influence the outcome. Adherence
can be a challenge in the adolescent population. To better counsel parents and patients on their adherence, braces can be fitted with sensors
to monitor duration of wear, and surgeons can review this data with
families during follow-­up appointments.
Braces are offered for treatment of skeletally immature patients with
curves >30 degrees at the first visit or in patients who are being followed and have developed progression of their curvature beyond 25
degrees. Bracing is ineffective in curvatures >45 degrees because these
patients have already reached the threshold for surgical intervention.

4245

The brace is worn until complete cessation of growth in males, but in
females, weaning from the brace may be considered when the patient is
more than 2 years postmenarchal, is a Risser 4 or greater, and has grown
less than a centimeter over the previous 6 months. Some practitioners
will continue with the bracing beyond these parameters and base their
weaning on the Sanders scale and/or assessment of the maturity of
the distal radius and ulna, especially when the curve is more than 40
degrees because these curves are thought to have a significant incidence
of progression after bracing has been completed. There also has been
interest in using the Schroth method, which involves physical therapy
in addition to a bracing program. While several studies have suggested
that the Schroth method may enhance the success of a bracing program,
further study will be required to make definitive recommendations.
Serial body casting (Mehta casting) can be performed in patients
with early-­onset scoliosis to minimize the risk of curve progression and
potentially delay the necessity of growing spine procedures. In some
cases, the scoliosis can be permanently corrected without the need for
long-­term bracing or surgery. Although most patients can tolerate casting well, the treatment is labor intensive, and there may be a negative
impact on health-­related quality of life for patients and their caregivers
during and potentially after casting. Nonetheless, this quality-­of-­life
effect must be carefully weighed against the risk of increased complications in patients who begin earlier growth-sparing spine surgery. One
study found the risk of unplanned reoperation was 3 times higher in
those who had growth-sparing spine surgery before age 3 when compared with those who were able to delay surgery.
Traditional surgical treatment involves spinal instrumentation and
fusion and is usually recommended for skeletally immature patients
with progressive curves >45 degrees and skeletally mature patients
with curves >50 degrees. Some surgeons will also consider surgery
for lumbar curves >35 degrees, particularly if associated with truncal
imbalance. The goals of surgery are to arrest progression of the deformity, to improve cosmesis, and to achieve a balanced spine, all while
minimizing the number of vertebral segments that are stabilized and
thereby preserving as much motion as possible.
Implants including pedicle screws, sublaminar wires or bands, and
hooks are attached to two longitudinal rods (Fig. 720.4). All implants
function by allowing the application of mechanical forces to the spine,
correcting the deformity in both the frontal and lateral planes to
achieve normal frontal and sagittal spinal balance. Pedicle screw constructs also allow for derotational maneuvers, correcting the rib prominences associated with the axial component of the deformity. After
instrumentation, the spine is decorticated, and bone graft is placed for
the fusion portion of the procedure. The strength of modern spinal
implants maintains correction without requiring a postoperative brace
in most cases.
Most procedures are performed posteriorly using pedicle screw fixation, which affords excellent correction, especially of the rotational
component of the deformity. Posterior osteotomies are often added
to enhance flexibility and improve the degree of correction in stiffer
curves. Anterior spinal releases requiring a thoracotomy are performed
infrequently as a result of the efficacy of pedicle screw instrumentation. Open anterior thoracic and thoracolumbar procedures violate the
chest wall and often the diaphragm. Pulmonary function may take up
to 2 years to return to normal values. Although thoracoscopic techniques may be used to perform anterior spinal release with or without
instrumentation and fusion, their use has been limited because of the
efficacy of posterior pedicle screw constructs. However, patients with
conditions such as neurofibromatosis and myelomeningocele have a
higher likelihood of achieving a nonunion of their fusion, and an anterior fusion may be considered in addition to the posterior fusion in
these groups. Additionally, patients with severe, neglected deformities
may still benefit from combined anterior and posterior procedures.
Younger patients, in whom the triradiate cartilage remains open, are
at risk for “crank shafting,” or progressive deformity due to continued
anterior spinal growth, after a posterior fusion. Traditionally, these
patients were treated by simultaneous anterior fusion to remove this
growth potential; however, the rigidity of pedicle screw constructs has
negated the need for this additional surgery. While an anterior fusion

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4246 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

A

B

Fig. 720.5 A postoperative lateral radiograph of a skeletally imma-

Fig. 720.4 Preoperative standing posteroanterior radiograph of

ture patient with severe syndromic scoliosis after placement of growing
rods.

with instrumentation can be considered for idiopathic thoracolumbar
and lumbar curves, the posterior approach with pedicle screw fixation
is being used more frequently to avoid the need for anterior surgery
and chest wall violation.
Very young patients with growing spines are not candidates for
definitive posterior spinal fusion, as this will limit their lung capacity.
A commonly employed simple measurement of thoracic height (a vertical line drawn from T1-­T12) can help guide treatment decisions, with
fusion not recommended for patients with a thoracic height <22 cm.
In patients with remaining thoracic growth, growing spine procedures are recommended when surgical intervention is required.
The most commonly used implants are growing rods (traditional
and magnetic) and the vertical expandable prosthetic titanium rib
(VEPTR).
Growing rods have fixation points placed at the proximal and distal
ends of the spinal deformity, which are then linked to subcutaneous
expandable rods, spanning the length of the deformity (Fig. 720.5).
These fixation points can be pedicle screws or hooks that affix to the
posterior elements of the spine. Traditional growing rods require
additional minor operations to lengthen the rods, performed about
every 6-8 months. Magnetically controlled growing rods (MCGRs),
once inserted, can be lengthened in the clinic using an external device,
thereby eliminating the need for further surgeries. Even with MCGR,
complications are relatively common, with 39% of patients experiencing at least one complication, including rod breakage, screw/
hook failure, failure of the rod to lengthen, and surgical site infection (though the risk of infection is lower than in traditional growing
rods). Whether patients have traditional or magnetic growing rods,
a final fusion is usually necessary once they have sufficient thoracic
height or attain skeletal maturity. In selected cases in which the device
is stable and the curve is well controlled once patients have achieved
adequate pulmonary maturity and chest wall growth, observation

has been selected rather than definitive fusion. Minimal correction
is achieved when converting growth sparing implants to definitive
spinal fusion because there is local osteopenia and usually fibrous or
osseous fusions at a subset of spinal segments. In patients who have
elected observation rather than conversion to a fusion, the indications
for conversion would include implant failure/loss of correction and/
or progression of curvature.
The VEPTR (Fig. 720.6) helps young children with thoracic insufficiency syndrome and is also used for early-­onset scoliosis in patients
with congenital or neuromuscular diagnoses. Long-­term survival rates
are favorable for these extremely severe deformity patients treated by
VEPTR, though the risk of implant-­related complications is substantial. Surgery in these young syndromic patients carries a substantial
risk of complications, and one study reported a complication rate of
nearly 85% with a mortality rate of over 15% over the entire course of
operative treatment for early-­onset scoliosis.
Significant interest remains in developing surgical techniques to
treat AIS that can avoid spinal fusion. One fusionless technique currently used is anterior vertebral body tethering, consisting of a flexible
cord attached with screws to affected vertebrae, allowing for correction of a curve dynamically by limiting growth on the curve convexity. Although the device most certainly limits motion to some extent,
one would expect greater motion than patients treated with fusion.
The ideal indications for tethering remain unclear, though commonly
employed criteria are patients age 9-15 years with thoracic curves of
40-67 degrees and Risser stage of ≤1.
A meta-­analysis of tethering found that pooled complication rates
were 26% for patients treated with a tether versus 0.6% for those treated
with a standard posterior spinal fusion. Additionally, the mean reoperation rates in studies that had at least 3 years of follow-­up were 24.7%
in patients treated with tethers versus 1.8% in posterior spinal fusion
patients. Patients treated with posterior spinal fusion have a mean revision rate at 10 years of 7.5% (i.e., >90% are definitively treated with a
single procedure).
Another novel fusionless treatment is the ApiFix, which is an
expandable, ratcheting, hinged rod connected to a cluster of pedicle
screws above and below a curve. The device is placed posteriorly and
can allow more motion than traditional fusion techniques, but this has
been associated with a 50% complication rate within 2 years, including

a 14-­
yr-­
old female who was skeletally immature and developed a
68-­degree right thoracic and a 53-­degree left lumbar scoliosis (A). Her
trunk was shifted to the right, and the left shoulder was slightly depressed. Based on the risk of future progression, she was treated by an
instrumented posterior spinal fusion from T3 to L3 with correction of
the right thoracic curve to 20 degrees and the left lumbar curve to 10
degrees (B). Coronal spinal balance was restored, and shoulder height
was maintained.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 720 u The Spine

4247

cysts, teratomas, dermoid sinuses, fibrous bands, and a tight filum
terminale. Cutaneous findings that may be seen in patients with
closed spinal dysraphism include hair patches, skin tags or dimples,
sinuses, and hemangiomas. Infants with these cutaneous abnormalities overlying the spine may benefit from ultrasonography to rule out
an occult spinal dysraphic condition. MRI is often delayed in older
patients until a clinical indication is present, such as tethering of the
spinal cord, which may present as back or leg pain, calf atrophy, progressive unilateral foot deformity (especially cavovarus), and problems with bowel or bladder function.

CLASSIFICATION OF CONGENITAL SCOLIOSIS

Congenital scoliosis is classified by the type of developmental abnormality: either a failure of formation or a failure of segmentation. The
deformities are then further described by the anatomic features of the
affected vertebrae. Failure of formation results in wedge vertebrae or
hemivertebrae. Failure of segmentation results in unilateral bar vertebrae or block vertebrae. Some instances of congenital scoliosis result
from a combination of both failure of formation and failure of segmentation (Fig. 720.7). One or more bony anomalies may occur in isolation
or in combination.

NATURAL HISTORY OF CONGENITAL SCOLIOSIS
Fig. 720.6 A postoperative posteroanterior radiograph of a patient
with Jeune syndrome after placement of a right rib-­to-­rib VEPTR (vertical expandable prosthetic titanium rib).

implant breakage, failure of the ratchet mechanism, osteolysis, and
bacterial seeding of implants.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

720.2 Congenital Scoliosis
R. Justin Mistovich, Keith D. Baldwin, and
David A. Spiegel
Congenital scoliosis is a spinal deformity that results from abnormal
development of the vertebrae. Asymmetric spinal growth due to one
or more vertebral anomalies leads to spinal curvature. Although the
malformation is present at birth, it may not become clinically apparent
until a later time as growth progresses.

ETIOLOGY

Embryologic development of the spine begins at the fifth week of gestation. An insult to the normal developmental process occurs, resulting
in abnormal growth of one or more vertebrae. Oftentimes, this abnormal development is associated with additional developmental anomalies or known syndromic conditions, including Alagille, Jarcho-­Levin,
Klippel-­Fiel, Goldenhar, and VACTERL syndromes.

ASSOCIATED CONDITIONS

It is common for children with congenital scoliosis to have associated
malformations in other organ systems that must be ruled out. Genitourinary abnormalities are identified in 20–40% of children with
congenital scoliosis and include unilateral renal agenesis, ureteral
duplication, horseshoe kidney, and genital anomalies. Approximately
2% of these patients have a silent obstructive uropathy. Renal ultrasonography should be performed early on in all children with congenital
scoliosis; other studies such as CT or MRI may also be required.
Cardiac anomalies are identified in 10–54% of patients. A thorough
cardiac examination should be performed as well as a referral to pediatric cardiology for consideration of echocardiography.
Intraspinal anomalies are identified in approximately 15–40%
of patients. Spinal dysraphism is the general term applied to such
lesions (see Chapters 631 and 689). Examples include diastematomyelia, split cord malformations, intraspinal lipomas, arachnoid

The risk of progression depends on the growth potential of each
anomaly, which may vary considerably. Close radiographic follow-­up
is required. Progression of these curves is most pronounced during
periods of rapid growth associated with the first 2-3 years of life and
adolescence.
The anatomic characteristics of the malformed vertebra play a significant role in the progression of deformity. The most severe form
of congenital scoliosis is a unilateral unsegmented bar with a contralateral hemivertebra. In this anomaly, the spine is fused to the side of
the unsegmented bar but also has a growth center on the other side at
the location of the hemivertebra at the same level. This combination
of deformities in the bony spine results in a rapidly progressive curve.
All affected patients usually require surgical stabilization. A unilateral
unsegmented bar is also associated with significant progression and in
most cases will require surgical intervention. An isolated hemivertebra
must be followed closely, and many, but not all, of these will be associated with a progressive deformity that requires surgical intervention.
In contrast, an isolated block vertebra has little growth potential and
rarely requires treatment.

TREATMENT OF CONGENITAL SCOLIOSIS

Early diagnosis and prompt treatment of progressive curves are essential. Bracing is not traditionally indicated for most congenital curves
due to their structural nature, except in rare cases to control additional curves not associated with the bony abnormality or to attempt
to delay surgery until a safer age for a surgical procedure. Once a bony
abnormality is identified that is likely to progress, surgery is recommended before progression occurs, preventing development or further
inevitable progression of spinal deformity. If the deformity has already
developed, surgical correction is difficult to achieve and the risk of neurologic complications is high.
Surgical techniques depend on the curve anatomy, flexibility, patient
age, and surgeon preference. Young patients with growing spines may
benefit from a growing spine procedure to allow further growth while
limiting curve progression. In terms of definitive fusion, an anterior
and posterior spinal fusion was often historically required, though with
pedicle screw constructs, a posterior fusion can be sufficient. A convex
hemiepiphysiodesis is an option for selected cases with milder curves and
younger patients, fusing only one side of the spine to allow some correction of the deformity by permitting growth on the noninvolved side of the
curve. Complete excision of a hemivertebra along with fusion of a short
segment of the spine through a posterior approach has been performed
with greater frequency and often in early childhood. A definitive fusion is
still required for many progressive curvatures at skeletal maturity.
Adolescents with a congenital etiology of their spinal deformities are
at higher risk of developing in-­hospital complications than those with

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4248 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Defects of Segmentation
Block vertebra

Unilateral Bar

Unilateral Bar and Hemivertebra

Unilateral
failure of
segmentation

Bilateral
failure of
segmentation

Defects of Formation
Hemivertebra

Wedge vertebra

Unilateral
complete
failure of
formation

Unilateral
partial failure
of formation

Fig. 720.7 The defects of segmentation and

Fully segmented Semi segmented

Incarcerated

Nonsegmented

idiopathic scoliosis, including shock, infection, and acute respiratory
distress syndrome.

SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCE: THORACIC
INSUFFICIENCY SYNDROME

When multiple levels of the thoracic spine are involved in the presence of fused ribs, a progressive three-­dimensional deformity of the
chest wall may impair lung development and function. This development is termed thoracic insufficiency syndrome, when the chest wall
is unable to support normal respiration, which can result in decreased
life expectancy (Chapter 467.5).
Thoracic insufficiency syndrome may be seen in patients with several
recognized conditions such as Jarcho-­Levin syndrome (spondylocostal or
spondylothoracic dysplasia) and Jeune syndrome (asphyxiating thoracic
dystrophy) as well as patients with early-­onset scoliosis (idiopathic, neuromuscular, or congenital) and severe spinal deformities in older patients.
These difficult cases are treated with expansion thoracoplasty, in which
the thoracic cage is gradually expanded over time by progressive lengthening of the chest wall on the concavity of the spinal deformity (or in some
cases on both sides of the spine). The procedure involves an opening wedge
thoracostomy, followed by placement of a VEPTR. The implant is then
lengthened at regular intervals (Fig. 720.8). The primary goal is to gradually correct the chest wall deformity to improve pulmonary function, and
a secondary goal is correction of an associated spinal deformity. In patients
with associated fused ribs, insertion of a VEPTR with an opening wedge
thoracostomy results in improved pulmonary function. VEPTR also has
been used successfully in patients with early-­onset congenital scoliosis.
Complications are frequent, and multiple procedures are required; however, this strategy offers hope for many patients with complex, challenging
cases. The decision of whether to proceed with a final spinal arthrodesis
once chest wall and pulmonary development are thought to be adequate
will depend on the specifics of each case. Some patients may elect to be
followed even after skeletal maturity if the implant remains in stable position. Further research will be required to answer this and other questions.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

formation that can occur during spinal development. (From McMaster MJ. Congenital scoliosis. In Weinstein SL, ed. The Pediatric Spine:
Principles and Practice, 2nd ed. Philadelphia:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2001:163.)

720.3 Neuromuscular Scoliosis, Genetic
Syndromes, and Compensatory
Scoliosis
R. Justin Mistovich and David A. Spiegel

NEUROMUSCULAR SCOLIOSIS

Scoliosis is frequently identified in children with neuromuscular
diseases such as cerebral palsy, muscular dystrophies, myopathies,
spinal muscular atrophy, Friedreich’s ataxia, myelomeningocele,
polio, and arthrogryposis. Children with spinal cord injuries are
also at high risk to develop a progressive curvature. The etiology
and natural history of these patients differ from idiopathic and congenital scoliosis. Most cases result from weakness and/or imbalance
of the trunk musculature. Spasticity may also contribute to spinal
curvatures. In some cases, such as myelomeningocele, coexisting
congenital vertebral anomalies may be present, further contributing to curve development.
A spinal deformity is more common in patients with higher
degrees of neurologic impairment, particularly those who are nonambulatory with inadequate control of their trunk. It is diagnosed
in more than 70% of nonambulatory patients with cerebral palsy
and over 90% of patients with Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
The diagnosis is suspected on physical examination. In nonambulatory patients, the most common curve pattern is a long, sweeping
C-­shaped thoracolumbar or lumbar curve (Fig. 720.9). The curve is
typically associated with pelvic obliquity, which may have an impact
on seating balance. In contrast, ambulatory patients with diagnoses
such as Friedreich ataxia may have curve patterns more similar to that
of idiopathic scoliosis.
In ambulatory patients, the examination is similar to the physical
examination for idiopathic scoliosis. In nonambulatory patients, the
back is inspected with the patient sitting upright. Any asymmetry
should be noted. These patients often need manual support to maintain
an upright position. If any progressive asymmetry is observed, sitting

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 720 u The Spine

A

B

Fig. 720.8 A, Anteroposterior preoperative radiograph of a 7-­mo-­old

infant with congenital scoliosis and fused ribs. A three-­dimensional reconstruction of a CT scan of the chest of this infant estimated his lung
volume to be 173.2 mL3. B, Anteroposterior radiograph after implantation of a vertically expandable prosthetic titanium rib and several expansions over 33 mo. The lung volume now measures 330.3 mL3, an increase
of 90.7%. (From Gollogly S, Smith JT, Campbell RM. Determining lung
volume with three-­dimensional reconstructions of CT scan data: a pilot
study to evaluate the effects of expansion thoracoplasty on children with
severe spinal deformities. J Pediatr Orthop. 2004;23:323–328.)

Fig. 720.9 Imaging shows a long C-­shaped curve with convexity to

the left side and significant pelvic obliquity, a curve pattern often seen
in patients with neuromuscular scoliosis. (From Pruthi S. Scoliosis. In:
Coley BD, ed. Caffey’ Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 12th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2013: Fig 135-10B.)

PA and lateral radiographs should be obtained. Because prophylactic
treatment or bracing cannot alter the natural history of the disease, our
own preference is to establish the diagnosis clinically and obtain radiographs if the curve is noted to progress.
The clinical course of patients with neuromuscular scoliosis depends
on the severity of neuromuscular involvement as well as the nature of
the underlying disease process. Progressive diseases are often associated with progressive curvatures. The consequences of a progressive
scoliosis in the neuromuscular population involve function, especially
sitting and standing balance, and ease of hygiene and personal care.
Pulmonary dysfunction may be expected with the gradual deformation

4249

of the rib cage and vertebra-­pelvic axis, as well as collapse of the spine
with the pelvis impinging on the rib cage. Diaphragmatic function is
impaired, and changes in chest volume and chest wall architecture will
undoubtedly exacerbate the pulmonary dysfunction owing to underlying muscle weakness. Pulmonary function may be difficult to document
in some patient populations, especially those with severe cerebral palsy.
Additionally, patients with initial marginal ambulatory function may
lose the ability to walk altogether as their scoliosis advances. Curves
associated with pelvic obliquity result in asymmetric seating pressures,
which may limit sitting endurance and may cause skin breakdown and
decubitus ulcers. Patients may also experience pain from impingement
of the rib cage on the iliac crest.
The treatment of neuromuscular scoliosis depends on the age of
the patient, the underlying diagnosis, and the magnitude of the deformity. The goal is to achieve or maintain a straight spine over a level
pelvis, especially in the nonambulatory population, and to intervene
early before curve magnitude and rigidity become severe. Neuromuscular curves often continue to progress after skeletal maturity. Curves
of >40-50 degrees will continue to worsen over time. Brace treatment
does not affect the natural history of neuromuscular scoliosis, and
standard braces used for idiopathic scoliosis are poorly tolerated in
neuromuscular patients. A soft spinal orthosis may improve sitting
balance and ease of care, although it does not ultimately change the
natural history of the curvature.
A spinal arthrodesis should be offered to patients with progressive curvatures over 40-50 degrees. The indications will differ
somewhat based on the underlying diagnosis. For example, patients
with Duchenne muscular dystrophy are often offered surgery when
their curves progress beyond 20-30 degrees, before their anticipated
decline in pulmonary or cardiac function makes the procedure
riskier or precludes their ability to tolerate surgery. Ambulatory
patients with curvatures similar to those seen in idiopathic scoliosis
are managed by principles similar to those used with idiopathic etiologies. Patients who are nonambulatory with pelvic obliquity are
usually managed by a long spinal fusion extending from the upper
thoracic spine to the pelvis, or the lower lumbar spine in selected
cases. A brace is not required after this procedure. Treatment decisions must be individualized in nonambulatory patients with spastic quadriplegia and are based on loss of function, the potential to
improve hygiene or personal care, and the desires of the family and/
or caregivers. These treatment decisions are complex, and research
has demonstrated the benefit of formal decision aids for families to
assist with understanding treatment risks and benefits.
Although complications are relatively frequent in comparison to
patients with non­neuromuscular curves, the available literature suggests that most patients benefit in terms of function and ease of care.
Additionally, data suggest that corrective surgery for patients with
neuromuscular scoliosis may improve weight gain postoperatively.
It is important to identify risk factors for perioperative complications. Research studies have identified nonambulatory patients and
those with curves ≥60 degrees as having a significantly increased risk
of postoperative major complications, including ileus, pneumonia,
infection, and wound problems. Gastrostomy (G)-­tube dependence
and increased blood loss were also found to be risk factors for postoperative complications. Baclofen pumps have not been associated
with increased risk of complications. ASA classification ≥3, BMI ≥95th
percentile, and extension of fusion to the pelvis have been found to
be associated with postoperative infections. One study subclassified
patients with Gross Motor Function Classification System (GMFCS)
level 5 in terms of their risk for complications from spinal fusion.
These patients have severe functional limitations and are at a high risk
of perioperative complications, although not all are identical in terms
of risk factors. They identified four subgroups, based on the associated
presence of a G-­tube, tracheostomy, history of seizures, and nonverbal
status. Patients with none of these risk factors were subclassified as 5.0;
one associated risk factor was 5.1; two were 5.2; and three or more were
5.3. The rate of major complications for patients with 5.0 GMFCS levels

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4250 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
was 12%, whereas patients with 5.3 GMFCS level had a 49% rate of
major complications.

SYNDROMES AND GENETIC DISORDERS

This diverse group of diagnoses includes neurofibromatosis (see
Chapter 636.1), osteogenesis imperfecta (see Chapter 742), connective tissue diseases such as Marfan syndrome (see Chapter 743)
and Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome (see Chapter 744), and Prader-­Willi
syndrome (see Chapter 99). Patients with these diagnoses should
have their spine examined routinely during visits to their primary
care physician. The follow-­up and treatment are based on the age
of the patient, the degree of deformity, whether progression has
been documented, and the underlying diagnosis. Growth-­sparing
surgical strategies are appropriate in these diverse patient populations depending on curve onset. Each has unique aspects to their
medical and surgical care, often with anatomic abnormalities such
as dysplastic bone and dural ectasia, and as a group these diseases
have a higher rate of complications related to bleeding, wound healing, infection, neurologic dysfunction, nonunion, and the development of progressive curvatures above or below the instrumented
segments in comparison with patients requiring surgery for idiopathic scoliosis. Knowledge of the patient’s genetic disorder, including prognosis and life expectancy, is important when determining
whether surgical correction is appropriate.

COMPENSATORY SCOLIOSIS

Leg-­length inequality is a common clinical diagnosis and is usually associated with a small compensatory lumbar curvature (see
Chapter 717). This is one cause of false-­positive screening examinations. Patients with leg-­length inequality may have the pelvis
become tilted toward the shorter limb and subsequently develop an
associated lumbar curve. The apex of the curve points toward the
short leg. There is little evidence to suggest that a small compensatory lumbar curve places the patient at risk of progression or back
pain. However, children with leg-­length inequality may also have
idiopathic or congenital scoliosis. A standing radiograph may be
obtained with a block under the foot on the short side, which corrects the leg-­length discrepancy and levels the pelvis. If the curvature disappears when the limb-­length discrepancy is corrected, a
diagnosis of a compensatory curve is made. An alternative imaging
study is a PA radiograph with the patient seated.
In neuromuscular disorders such as polio (see Chapter 296) or
cerebral palsy (see Chapter 638.1), an adduction or abduction contracture of the hip, described as a fixed infrapelvic contracture,
may have an associated compensatory lumbar scoliosis to maintain
standing balance. For patients who ambulate, a 10-­degree fixed contracture will result in up to 3 cm of apparent leg-­length discrepancy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

720.4 Kyphosis
R. Justin Mistovich, Keith D. Baldwin, and
David A. Spiegel
The normal thoracic spine has 20-50 degrees of kyphosis from T3-­
T12 using the Cobb method on a standing lateral radiograph of the
spine. A thoracic kyphosis in excess of the normal range of values
is termed hyperkyphosis. Patients with hyperkyphosis may present
with cosmetic concerns, back pain, or both. A flexible or postural
kyphosis may be overcorrected voluntarily or with postural adjustment; however, a rigid kyphosis cannot be corrected passively.
Causes of rigid kyphosis include Scheuermann disease and congenital kyphosis, among others. Table 720.2 lists conditions associated with hyperkyphosis.

Table 720.2  Conditions Associated with Hyperkyphosis
• Trauma causing spinal fractures
• Spinal infections resulting from bacteria, tuberculosis, and fungi
• Metabolic diseases such as osteogenesis imperfecta or
osteoporosis
• Iatrogenic (laminectomy, spinal irradiation)
• Neuromuscular diseases
• Neoplasms
• Congenital/developmental
• Disorders of collagen such as Marfan syndrome
• Dysplasias such as neurofibromatosis, achondroplasia, and
mucopolysaccharidoses

The evaluation and treatment depend on the underlying diagnosis, the degree of deformity, curve flexibility, whether the deformity
is progressive, and severity of associated symptoms.

FLEXIBLE KYPHOSIS (POSTURAL KYPHOSIS)

Postural kyphosis is a common cosmetic concern and is most often
recognized by parents or peers. Adolescents with postural kyphosis
can correct the curvature voluntarily. A standing lateral radiograph
will show an increase in kyphosis but no pathologic changes of the
involved vertebrae. There is no evidence that postural kyphosis
progresses to a structural deformity. Although mild aching discomfort is sometimes reported, there is no evidence that the condition
leads to long-­term symptoms, alterations in function, or reduced
quality of life. The mainstay of treatment is reassurance. Physical
therapy can be considered for muscular discomfort. Although core
strengthening is certainly beneficial to most patients, no data suggest that a permanent alteration in alignment can be maintained.
Neither bracing nor surgery plays a role in the management of this
condition.

STRUCTURAL KYPHOSIS
Scheuermann Disease

Scheuermann disease is the most common form of structural hyperkyphosis and is defined by wedging of >5 degrees of three or more
consecutive vertebral bodies at the apex of the deformity on a lateral
radiograph. In addition, the apex of the thoracic kyphosis is lower
than expected. Other radiographic findings include irregularities
of the vertebral end plates and Schmorl nodes, which are herniations of the vertebral disk into the surface of the vertebral body. The
etiology remains unknown but most likely involves the influence
of mechanical forces in a genetically susceptible individual. Histologic specimens taken of patients with Scheuermann disease have
shown a disordered pattern of endochondral ossification. However,
it remains unclear whether these findings are the primary result of
a genetic or metabolic pathologic process, or simply the secondary result of mechanical overload. The reported incidence varies
from 0.4% to 10%, affecting males three times more frequently than
females.

Physical Exam and Clinical Manifestations

The patient should be examined from the side. Hyperkyphosis of the
thoracic spine will typically be associated with a sharp contour. The
apex of the deformity will often be in the lower thoracic spine. Patients
are unable to correct the deformity voluntarily. Pain is a relatively common complaint. It is typically mild and near the apex of the kyphosis.
The symptoms are intermittent, rarely severe, and occasionally limit
certain activities. Neurologic symptoms are uncommon.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 720 u The Spine

4251

1 year of growth remaining and a kyphosis of >55-60 degrees may
benefit from a bracing program. A Milwaukee brace, which extends
up to the neck, is recommended for curves with an apex above T7,
whereas curves with a lower apex may often be treated by a thoracolumbar orthosis. The brace should be worn for up to 23 hours daily.
Consideration may also be given to a serial casting or stretching
program to gain flexibility before instituting the brace program. The
goal of the brace is to prevent progression. A permanent improvement in alignment is seen less frequently. Skeletally mature patients
with little or no pain and acceptable cosmesis are not treated. In
patients with progressive deformity >70-80 degrees who are dissatisfied with their cosmetic appearance or have persistent back pain
despite nonoperative measures, a spinal fusion may be considered.
Patients treated operatively have less pain and greater satisfaction
with their outcome compared to those treated nonoperatively.
An instrumented posterior spinal fusion from the upper thoracic
to the mid-­lumbar spine is commonly performed, with spinal osteotomies to allow compression of the posterior elements to facilitate
deformity correction. These osteotomies allow for shortening of the
spine, which should reduce the risks of neurologic complications.
An alternative that was used with frequency in the past is combining an anterior spinal release (diskectomies and fusion) with the
posterior spinal fusion. This strategy has been used less frequently
because of increased complications, length of stay, and costs, in
addition to the satisfactory outcomes associated with posterior only
surgery. Procedures for kyphosis carry a higher risk than fusions
performed for AIS.

CONGENITAL KYPHOSIS
Fig. 720.10 Standing lateral radiograph of a 14-­yr-­old boy with se-

vere Scheuermann kyphosis. This measures 92 degrees between T3
and T12. Note the wedging of the vertebrae at T6, T7, T8, and T9. The
normal thoracic kyphosis is ≤40 degrees.

Radiographic Evaluation

The standard imaging protocol includes standing PA and lateral radiographs (Fig. 720.10). A specific, standardized technique in which the
arms are folded across the chest is recommended for the lateral view.
In addition to the diagnostic findings noted earlier, a mild scoliosis is
commonly seen. Less frequently, a spondylolisthesis may be identified
on the lateral radiograph.

Natural History

Treatment depends on the age of the patient, the degree of deformity,
and whether any symptoms are present. Adolescent patients with
Scheuermann kyphosis may have more complaints of back pain compared to other adolescents, but this often improves after skeletal maturity. A long-­term follow-­up study noted continued curve progression
at about half a degree annually and poorer health-­related quality of life
compared to normative population values. Kyphotic deformities >90
degrees are more likely to be esthetically unacceptable, symptomatic,
and progressive. Deformities more than 100 degrees may be associated
with restrictive pulmonary dysfunction.

Treatment

There are few absolute guidelines for treatment, and decisions must
therefore be individualized. Skeletally immature patients with mild
deformity may benefit from a hyperextension exercise program,
but the effects of this strategy on pain relief and spinal alignment,
or the natural history, remain unknown. Patients with more than

Congenital kyphosis results from congenital anomalies of the vertebrae. In an anterior failure of formation (type I), a portion of
the vertebral body fails to form. The resulting kyphosis is typically
identified after birth and carries a high risk of progression and
neurologic dysfunction. Spinal cord dysfunction commonly results
from compression at the apex of the deformity. The second type of
congenital kyphosis involves an anterior failure of segmentation, in
which two vertebrae are fused (type II). The posterior elements of
the spine continue to grow, but the anterior spine does not, resulting in a variably progressive kyphosis and a much lower risk of
neurologic dysfunction. Patients must be followed closely, and
treatment is required in a significant number of cases. Similar to
congenital scoliosis, abnormalities of other organ systems should
be ruled out.
The treatment depends on the type of malformation, the degree
of deformity, and whether neurologic symptoms are present. Bracing is ineffective, and surgical treatment is the only option for
progressive curves. Because the natural history is poor for type I
deformities and neurologic deterioration is likely, spinal fusion is
usually performed shortly after the diagnosis is made. The surgical goals are to prevent or treat kyphotic deformities to restore
adequate spinal alignment, while avoiding neurologic deterioration and complications and maximizing spinal growth to the extent
possible. This usually involves some form of limited spinal fusion,
which may include anterior and/or posterior components, with or
without resection of the vertebral remnant, and spinal instrumentation. Ideally, only a short segment of the spine will be fused to try to
maximize trunk height. Deformities resulting from anterior failure
of segmentation also require spinal stabilization in some cases, but
progression is typically slower, and patients are often followed over
years to determine whether surgical stabilization will be required.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4252 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

720.5 Back Pain in Children
R. Justin Mistovich, Keith D. Baldwin, and
David A. Spiegel
Back pain is a frequent complaint in pediatric and adolescent
patients, with studies demonstrating single-­year prevalence rates
between 7% and 58% of adolescents. An epidemiologic cross-­
sectional survey found 33.7% of children 10-18 years old experienced back pain within the prior year, with 8.9% of them describing
the pain as severe. Risk factors for back pain include increasing
growth, female sex, family history, overuse injury resulting from
sport participation, manual labor, mobile phone usage of more than
10 hours per week (back and neck pain), and possibly carrying a
heavy backpack. Patients with scoliosis commonly have back pain;
up to 25% may rate this as severe. The pain may be linked to anxiety,
depression, and/or substance misuse (smoking, alcohol); psychosocial factors are often underappreciated. Younger patients are felt to
have a greater likelihood of a pathologic diagnosis, and therefore
a more aggressive workup has been suggested. The incidence of
both pediatric and adolescent back pain has increased, whereas the
proportion of patients having diagnosable pathology is decreasing,
with 75–80% of patients having a negative workup. These trends
add further complexity to determining the proper approach to diagnosis and treatment. The differential diagnosis is extensive (Table
720.3). Although the likelihood of serious pathology is low, a complete history and careful physical exam must be performed on all
patients (Table 720.4).

CLINICAL EVALUATION

Providers should take a full history, identifying the location, character,
and duration of symptoms. Any history of acute trauma or repetitive
physical activities should be sought. It is important to identify patients
with at-­risk athletic pursuits, including football linemen or gymnasts
who have a high incidence of spondylolysis and spondylolisthesis.
Symptoms consistent with a neoplastic or infectious etiology include
pain that is constant or unrelenting, not relieved by rest, and wakes the
patient from sleep. Fevers, chills, night sweats, or constitutional symptoms of weight loss or malaise are additional red flags for infectious or
neoplastic processes (see Table 720.4).
Symptoms of neurologic dysfunction must also be uncovered.
Patients should be questioned about the presence of any radicular
symptoms, gait disturbance, muscle weakness, alterations in sensation, muscle atrophy, and changes in bowel or bladder function.
The physical examination includes a complete musculoskeletal and
neurologic assessment. The patient should be adequately undressed
for the clinical exam. The provider should inspect the patient from the
back and the side, identifying any changes in alignment in the frontal
or sagittal plane. Assessment of range of motion in flexion, extension,
and lateral bending should be performed. Recall that pain with extension suggests pathology within the posterior elements of the spine,
such as spondylolysis. Forward flexion will exacerbate pain linked to
abnormalities of the anterior column of the spine (vertebral body or
disk), such as a herniated disk or diskitis.
Palpation will reveal any areas of point tenderness over the posterior
bony elements of the spinal column or the muscles and identify muscle
spasm or strain.
Because pain may be referred from a nonspine region, an
abdominal examination should be performed, and a gynecologic
evaluation should also be considered. Pathology at the sacroiliac
joint may also mimic low back pain. This joint should be stressed
by compression of the iliac wings or by external rotation at the hip
(Faber test).
A detailed neurologic examination should be performed, including manual muscle testing, sensation, proprioception, and reflexes.
The patient should be examined for myelopathy by performing the
Babinski test, assessing for hyperreflexia, and checking for sustained (more than three beats) of clonus. The superficial cutaneous
abdominal reflex should be tested by gently stroking the skin on

Table 720.3  Differential Diagnosis of Back Pain
INFECTIOUS AND INFLAMMATORY DISEASES
Spondylodiscitis*
Vertebral osteomyelitis (pyogenic, tuberculosis)
Spinal epidural abscess
Transverse myelitis
Pyelonephritis*
Perinephric abscess
Pancreatitis
Paraspinal muscle abscess, myositis
Psoas abscess
Endocarditis
Pelvic osteomyelitis or myositis
Pelvic inflammatory disease
RHEUMATOLOGIC DISEASES
Pauciarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis*
Reactive arthritis
Ankylosing spondylitis
Psoriatic arthritis
Inflammatory bowel disease
Fibrositis, fibromyalgia
DEVELOPMENTAL DISEASES
Spondylolysis*
Spondylolisthesis*
Scheuermann kyphosis*
Scoliosis
Chiari malformation type 1 with or without syringomyelia
Spinal dysraphism
Cauda equina syndrome
MECHANICAL TRAUMA AND ABNORMALITIES
Muscle strain/sprain*
Hip/pelvic anomalies (sacroiliac joint dysfunction)
Herniated disk (rare)
Juvenile osteoporosis (rare)
Overuse syndromes (facet syndrome)*
Vertebral stress fractures
Vertebral compression fractures
Limbus vertebra
Lumbosacral sprain*
Seatbelt injury
Trauma (direct injury; e.g., motor vehicle crash)*
Strain from heavy knapsacks
Radiculopathy (sciatica)
NEOPLASTIC DISEASES
Primary vertebral tumors (osteogenic sarcoma, Ewing sarcoma)
Metastatic tumor (neuroblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma)
Primary spinal tumor (neuroblastoma, lipoma, cysts, astrocytoma,
ependymoma)
Malignancy of bone marrow (ALL, lymphoma)
Benign tumors (eosinophilic granuloma, osteoid osteoma,
osteoblastoma, bone cyst)
OTHER
Disk space calcification (idiopathic, after diskitis)
Conversion reaction
Sickle cell anemia*
Nephrolithiasis
Hemolysis (acute)
Hematocolpos
Postprocedure pain after lumbar puncture
*Common.
ALL, Acute lymphocytic leukemia.
Modified from Marcdante KJ, Kliegman RM, Schuh AM. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics,
9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023:774.

each of the four quadrants surrounding the umbilicus. Normally,
the umbilicus will move toward the area stimulated. A normal
examination includes symmetry in the response on both sides of
the midline, even if the reflex cannot be elicited on either side. An
abnormal test suggests the presence of a subtle abnormality of spinal cord function, most commonly syringomyelia. A straight leg

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 720 u The Spine
Table 720.4  Red Flags: Most Common Indications from
History and Examination for Pathologic
Findings Needing Special Attention and
Sometimes Immediate Action

4253

720.6 Spondylolysis and Spondylolisthesis
R. Justin Mistovich, Keith D. Baldwin, and
David A. Spiegel

A detailed history and physical exam are the most important components of the initial evaluation and should focus on identifying “red flags”
and differentiating between mechanical and nonmechanical back pain
(see Table 720.4). Findings consistent with a nonmechanical etiology
warrant a more aggressive evaluation and/or prompt referral.
Patients with mechanical or muscular back pain and symptoms that
are activity related and improve with rest are typically treated by rest for
a few days or activity restrictions and nonnarcotic analgesics. Physical
therapy for core strengthening should be considered if the acute symptoms do not resolve or if the pain is chronic. The patient should be asked
to return for a follow-­up appointment after 4-6 weeks. Plain radiographs
are commonly obtained at the discretion of individual practitioners.
However, if no red flags are present, providers may defer radiographs
because of the cumulative adverse effects of radiation exposure. Patients
presenting with red flags or those who have not improved after 6 weeks
of conservative care necessitate further investigation.

Spondylolysis represents a defect in the pars interarticularis, the segment of bone connecting the superior and inferior articular facets in
the vertebra. It is thought to result from repetitive hyperextension
stresses, in which compressive forces are transmitted from the inferior
articular facet of the superior vertebra to the pars interarticularis of the
inferior vertebra. Supporting the mechanical theory, spondylosis has
never been described in nonambulatory adults. However, there may be
a genetic association with 19–69% of affected patients having a first-­
degree relative also affected. A stress fracture, unilateral or bilateral,
may progress to a spondylolysis. In many cases, this stress fracture does
not heal, resulting in a pseudarthrosis, or false joint, and thereby allowing motion through this bony area where motion should not normally
exist.
Spondylolysis is common in athletes who engage in repetitive spinal
hyperextension, especially gymnasts, football interior linemen, weightlifters, and wrestlers. Approximately 4–8% of the entire pediatric population is affected, making it the most common cause of back pain in
adolescents when a diagnosis can be established. Patients with excessive lordosis in the lumbar spine may be predisposed to developing a
spondylolysis, and a genetic component has also been suggested. The
lesion is most common at L5, but it may be identified at upper lumbar
levels as well.
Spondylolisthesis represents a forward slippage of one vertebra on
another and is identified in approximately 4–5% of the population.
The multiple causes of spondylolisthesis include dysplastic/congenital
defects, isthmic (due to a pars stress fracture), trauma, and neoplasm.
In children and adolescents, the most common types are dysplastic
and isthmic. Between 5% and 15% of patients with spondylolysis will
develop spondylolisthesis.
Spondylolisthesis is assessed on a standing lateral radiograph of
the lumbosacral junction according to (1) the percentage of forward translation of one vertebra on the other, (2) the slip angle,
measuring the rotation of the involved vertebrae in the sagittal
plane, and (3) relative position of the sacrum during upright posture. A grade 1 slip of L5 on S1 has <25% of the width of the
vertebral body of L5 translated anteriorly on S1. Similarly, grade
2 is 25–50%, grade 3 is 50–75%, and grade 4 is 75–100%. Spondyloptosis, or grade 5 spondylolisthesis, describes a complete displacement of one vertebral body on the level below. The slip angle,
which demonstrates the degree to which the superior vertebra is
flexed forward relative to the underlying vertebra, and the verticality of the sacrum both have a significant effect on sagittal balance or the relationship of the sagittal weight-­b earing axis to the
body segments. Abnormalities in sagittal spinal balance may be
associated with compensatory flexion of the knees during ambulation, hamstring spasm and/or contracture, and back pain.

RADIOGRAPHIC AND LABORATORY EVALUATION

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

• Children younger than 18 yr old with considerable pain
• History of violent trauma
• Nonmechanical nature of pain (i.e., constant pain not affected by
movement; pain at night)
• History of cancer
• Systemic steroid use
• Drug use
• HIV infection or other immunocompromised patients
• Unintentional weight loss
• Systemically ill, particularly signs of infections such as fever or
night sweats
• Persisting severe restriction of motion or intense pain with
minimal motion
• Structural deformity including scoliosis, Chiari malformation,
tethered cord
• Difficulty with micturition (urinary retention)
• Loss of anal sphincter tone or fecal incontinence
• Progressive motor weakness or gait disturbance, paresthesias, pes
cavus, foot drop, saddle anesthesia
• Marked morning stiffness
• Peripheral joint involvement
• Iritis, skin rashes, colitis, urethral discharge, or other symptoms of
rheumatologic disease
• Inflammatory disorder such as ankylosing spondylitis suspected
• Family history of rheumatologic disease or structural abnormality

raise test should be done to check for nerve root tension secondary
to a herniated disk, slipped vertebral apophysis, or other pathology. This examination should reproduce any neurologic symptoms
distal to the knee.

MEDICAL DECISION-­MAKING

When further workup is indicated, PA and lateral radiographs of the
involved region of the spine are the initial images of choice. Some clinicians will also use oblique radiographs of the lumber spine when spondylolysis is in the differential diagnosis. If plain radiographs are normal,
advanced imaging modalities should be considered, including a three-­
phase technetium bone scan, a bone scan with single-­photon emission
computed tomography (SPECT) if spondylolysis is suspected, CT for
viewing osseous detail, and MRI for viewing soft tissue detail or bony areas
of inflammation.
When systemic signs or constitutional symptoms are present, a
CBC, ESR, and CRP should be ordered. In certain cases, laboratory
tests to evaluate for inflammatory diseases such as juvenile idiopathic
arthritis, seronegative spondyloarthropathies, and ankylosing spondylitis are indicated.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Spondylolysis may occasionally be asymptomatic and diagnosed incidentally on imaging obtained for other reasons. It usually presents with
mechanical low back pain that may radiate to the buttocks, with or
without spasm of the hamstring muscles. Neurologic symptoms are
rare in patients with spondylolysis. However, patients with spondylolisthesis may experience neurologic symptoms from compression or
stretching of the nerve roots, causing radiculopathy or even the surgical emergency of cauda equina in which bowel and bladder function
is affected.

PHYSICAL EXAM

Patients with spondylolysis often have discomfort with spinal
extension or hyperextension. Provocative testing may include keeping the spine extended for 10-20 seconds to see if back pain can
be reproduced. There may be discomfort with palpation of the spinous process of the involved vertebra. Patients with higher grades

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4254 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
of spondylolisthesis demonstrate loss of lumbar lordosis, flattening
of the buttocks on visual inspection, and a vertical sacrum resulting
from posterior rotation of the pelvis. A step-­off may be palpated
between the spinous processes of the involved vertebrae. Hamstring
contracture is tested by measuring the popliteal angle. The hip is
flexed to 90 degrees while fully extending the contralateral hip to
the level the pelvis. The knee is then passively extended, and the
popliteal angle represents the angle between the thigh (vertical) and
the lower leg axis. A careful, complete neurologic examination is
essential because diagnosis of spondylolysis and spondylolisthesis
is often delayed.

2

3

4

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION

The initial evaluation of the lumbar region should include high-­
quality AP and lateral radiographs. Some authors also prefer to
obtain oblique radiographs, which demonstrate the classic “Scotty
dog” finding on the pars interarticularis. The lumbar spine in
oblique radiograph projections normally appears to form the figure of a “Scotty dog” (i.e., Scottish terrier), with the transverse process forming the nose, the pedicle forming the eye, and the pars
interarticularis forming the neck; in spondylolysis, the pars interarticularis will have a defect or a break, mimicking a “collar” on the
radiograph. Standing PA and lateral radiographs of the entire spine
are obtained if findings suggestive of scoliosis or hyperkyphosis are
also present (Figs. 720.11 and 720.12). In patients with normal plain
films, traditional imaging studies included a bone scan with SPECT
to diagnose a spondylolysis during the earliest stage of a stress
reaction, before the formation of a stress fracture or an established
pseudarthrosis. The radiation exposure from this test, though, is
substantial—bone scans have 7-9 times the radiation dose of two-­
view plain films. In comparison, CT scans carry only 2 times the
radiation dose of two-­view plain films. The sensitivity of MRI using
STIR imaging is comparable to SPECT and led to a recommendation for MRI STIR rather than bone scans in acute cases in which
plain films could not make a diagnosis. MRI sequences will demonstrate inflammation associated with an acute spondylolysis while
avoiding radiation exposure. A CT scan with thin cuts may provide
additional information to establish the presence of a pars defect and
may be indicated in chronic, refractory cases. MRI is also indicated
in the presence of signs or symptoms of cauda equina or nerve root
involvement.

4

5

5

1

A

B

Fig. 720.11 A, Normal spine at 9 months of age. B, Spondylolysis in

the L4 vertebra at 10 yr of age. (From Silverman FN, Kuhn JP. Essentials
of Caffrey’s Pediatric X-­ray Diagnosis. Chicago: Year Book Medical Publishers; 1990:94.)

TREATMENT

The asymptomatic patient with spondylolysis requires no treatment.
Patients with pain are treated initially by activity modification, physical
therapy for core strengthening, and analgesic medications. The use of a
lumbosacral orthosis, which immobilizes the spine in slight flexion to
decompress the posterior elements, may lead to a faster resolution of
symptoms, though a recent SRS Evidence Based Medicine Committee
report determined that the benefit of bracing is not well established.
This orthosis is typically worn for 3-4 months. Participation in sports
or other activities that exacerbate pain should be restricted until the
symptoms have resolved. Providers should consider checking a vitamin D level in patients with spondylolysis and treating if deficient.
Most patients experience resolution of their symptoms even though
the spondylolysis heals in only a small number of patients. Surgery
should be offered for chronic, refractory back pain when conservative
measures have failed. For those with spondylolysis at L5, a posterior
spinal fusion from L5 to S1 is indicated as the mobility at this joint is
limited relative to that observed at higher levels in the spine. For the
infrequent cases in which the defect is at higher levels in the lumbar
spine, techniques for repairing the pseudarthrosis without fusion are
considered.
Recommendations for the management of spondylolisthesis depend
on the age of the patient, the presence of pain or neurologic symptoms,
and the degree of deformity. For low-­grade lesions, the management
is similar to that for spondylolysis. Significant progressive slippage
may occur in 3–5% of skeletally immature patients, and patients must
be followed through skeletal maturity. Progression of deformity is

Fig. 720.12 Defect in the pars interarticularis (arrow) of the neural

arch of L5 (spondylolysis) that has permitted the body of L5 to slip forward (spondylolisthesis) on the body of S1. (From Silverman FN, Kuhn
JP. Essentials of Caffrey’s Pediatric X-­ray Diagnosis. Chicago: Year Book
Medical Publishers; 1990:95.)

increased in higher grade slips and in cases of dysplastic spondylolisthesis. However, there is only a 1.4% incidence of progression after
adolescence. Guidelines for the timing of follow-­up, and whether or
not to obtain routine radiographs at each follow-­up, differ between
individuals and institutions; we typically follow asymptomatic patients
yearly with a standing lateral of the lumbosacral junction. Nonoperative management in minimally symptomatic or asymptomatic patients
is appropriate, and delaying surgical treatment does not appear to
worsen outcomes.
For low-­grade slips with persistent symptoms despite nonoperative measures, an in situ posterior spinal arthrodesis is suggested.
Additionally, patients with a more kyphotic slip angle have been
shown to have poorer prognosis, although operative treatment did
not significantly improve their outcome. The surgical approach for
high-­grade slips varies between surgeons and institutions. The main

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 720 u The Spine

4255

principle is to stabilize the unstable segment of the spine, avoid
neurologic complications, and restore adequate sagittal balance
to the spine. The typical components of these complex procedures
include (1) posterior decompression of the L5 and S1 nerve roots
(laminectomy and takedown of pseudarthrosis), (2) instrumented
posterior spinal fusion from L4 or L5 to S1 and occasionally the
pelvis is included in the instrumentation, (3) diskectomy at L5-­S1
with placement of anterior column support (transforaminal cage or
fibular allograft from sacrum to L5), and (4) reduction of the slippage by positioning the hips in extension or by an “instrumented
reduction” using the spinal implants. Adding the anterior column
support enhances rates of fusion. Reduction improves radiographic
outcomes but may increase the risk of unplanned surgeries, pseudarthrosis (failure of fusion), and neurologic complications.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

720.7 Spine Infection
R. Justin Mistovich, Keith D. Baldwin, and
David A. Spiegel
Spondylitis, meaning inflammation of the vertebrae, is most commonly due to infectious or autoimmune processes. Spondylodiscitis is defined as a primary infection of the intervertebral disk
(diskitis) with spread to the vertebrae (osteomyelitis). Based on
MRI, some think the infection begins in the vertebral body with
subsequent rupture into the disk space. The most common etiology
is hematogenous seeding of bacteria, with the original infection of
the well-­perfused end plate extending into the disk and vertebral
body. Spondylodiscitis is more commonly seen in children younger
than 5 years of age but can occur at any age; it is often associated
with vertebral body osteomyelitis. Patients in the younger age range
have vascular channels between the vertebral end plate and the disk
space, explaining the prevalence of diskitis with osteomyelitis.
Staphylococcus aureus is the most common organism causing
spine infections. Other organisms include Kingella kingae and less
often group A streptococcus and Escherichia coli. Rare causes of
vertebral bone infection include tuberculosis (often multiple vertebral bodies), Serratia marcescens, brucellosis, and cat-­scratch disease. Blood cultures have a sensitivity of only 30%. Percutaneous or
less often open biopsy of the disk space is positive only 50–85% of
the time; polymerase chain reaction is indicated for the diagnosis
of Kingella. The differential diagnosis includes chronic recurrent
multifocal osteomyelitis.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

A high index of suspicion is required to establish the diagnosis of
infectious spondylodiscitis. Patients may experience back pain,
abdominal pain, fever, or malaise. Fever is less common and may
be present in only 30% of patients. Toddlers may develop a limp
or refuse to walk, stand, or sit. In an effort to reduce the pain associated with spinal motion, the child will hold the spine in a rigid
position. There may also be a paraspinal muscle spasm. Local point
tenderness over the affected spinous process is common. There may
be a “list” or leaning of the trunk when the patient is viewed from
the front or back, and from the side there may be a loss of lumbar
lordosis. Neurologic manifestations are rare and, if present, suggest
that an epidural abscess may be present. The infection may drain
beyond the spine to the paravertebral space and psoas muscles.
Spine flexion compresses the anterior elements of the spine and will
elicit an increase in pain. Asking a child to pick up an object from the
ground is a simple way to elicit this provocative test.
Although the white blood count may remain normal, the ESR is
elevated in 80% of cases, and the CRP is also elevated.

A

B

Fig. 720.13 Spondylodiscitis. Sagittal T2-­weighted (A) and coronal

short tau inversion recovery (B) images demonstrate destruction of T7-­
T8 intervertebral disk with abnormal marrow signal in the adjacent vertebral bodies and associated paravertebral soft tissue phlegmon. (From
Bosemani T, Huisman TAGM. Spine imaging. In: Walters MM, Robertson RL, eds. Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites, 4th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2017: Fig. 9.31, p. 345.)

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION

The earliest radiographic finding is a postural loss of lumbar lordosis.
Later characteristic features on plain radiographs are disk space narrowing, or loss of disk height, and irregularity of the adjacent vertebral
end plates. However, these findings do not develop until 2-3 weeks after
the onset of symptoms. The diagnosis may be established earlier using
MRI. MRI is the most sensitive and specific imaging to diagnose osteomyelitis and to identify abscesses and/or neural compression (Figs.
720.13 and 720.14).

TREATMENT

Once the diagnosis is suspected clinically, the treatment involves
symptomatic care and empiric anti-­staphylococcal antibiotics, as S.
aureus is the most common pathogen isolated. Kingella kingae is recognized as a common pathogen in patients from 6 months to 4 years
of age. A first-­generation cephalosporin (e.g., cefazolin) or semisynthetic antistaphylococcal penicillin (e.g., oxacillin) is recommended
in areas where methicillin-­resistant S. aureus (MRSA) is not prevalent. Clindamycin should be considered in areas where MRSA is more
common. Some areas of the world report increasing clindamycin resistance among both methicillin-­resistant and methicillin-­susceptible S.
aureus isolates, leading to consideration of vancomycin or linezolid.
Blood cultures should be obtained before the administration of antibiotics. The antibiotic agent may be modified if blood cultures are
positive. Symptomatic care includes rest and analgesics, antiinflammatory medications, and a spinal orthosis may also be considered. The
typical antibiotic course is from 4-6 weeks. Data in osteomyelitis suggest that conversion from intravenous to oral agents may be acceptable after several days depending on the clinical course (see Chapter

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4256 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
associations include preexisting disk degeneration, congenital malformation, and genetic or environmental factors. There may be a potential
association between disk degeneration and the herpes virus. Missense
pathogenic variants in collagen-­encoding genes may be present in 80%
of young patients with symptomatic lumbar disk herniations.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

A

B

Fig. 720.14 Tuberculous vertebral osteomyelitis in 13-­yr-­old female

with progressive loss of strength and coordination in legs. (A) Sagittal
reformatted soft-­tissue window images from a CT of the spine (B) sagittal fat-­saturated postcontrast T1-­weighted MR images of the thoracic
spine demonstrate marked kyphosis at site of bony collapse at the level
of the midthoracic spine (arrows in A and B), as well as surrounding
soft tissue abscess (arrowheads in B) predominately anteriorly, at the
same level. (Modified from Maddocks ABR, Pollock AN. Infections of
the spine and spinal cord. In: Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 44.8AC, p. 422.)

725). A CT-­guided needle biopsy of the disk space can be considered.
Although the diagnostic yield on cultures is low (20–40%), the pathologic findings may show acute inflammatory cells to establish the
diagnosis (≥1 neutrophil per high power field). This intervention is
often reserved for patients who do not respond to empiric antibiotics
or when there are questionable diagnostic features. Surgical treatment
is rarely required, and indications include establishing the diagnosis in
patients who fail to respond to empiric antibiotics, and those in whom
an abscess and/or neurologic involvement are identified.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

720.8 Intervertebral Disk Herniation/
Slipped Vertebral Apophysis
R. Justin Mistovich, Keith D. Baldwin, and
David A. Spiegel
Intervertebral disk herniation is the result of a tear in the outer layer
of the vertebral disk, called the annulus fibrosus, which then allows for
protrusion of the inner nucleus pulposus. At times, a free fragment of
disk can rupture and compress the nerve roots or spinal cord. Bulging
of the annulus without rupture may also be observed, resulting in back
pain and occasionally radicular symptoms. Symptoms are due to either
direct mechanical compression or a local inflammatory response.
Slipped vertebral apophysis, also called a posterior ring apophysis
separation, is due to an injury and is only found in skeletally immature patients. A small fragment of bone from the posterior corner of
the vertebral body apophysis avulses and may cause direct mechanical
compression to the spinal cord or nerve root, similar to a disk herniation. (An apophysis is a normal outgrowth of bone with its own
physis, or growth plate. Another example is the tibial tubercle.) Both
disk herniations and ring apophysis separations can cause back pain,
radicular symptoms (nerve root compression or irritation), or spinal
cord compression.

ETIOLOGY

Predisposing activities for both conditions include heavy lifting, repetitive axial loading activities, and occasionally traumatic injury such as
a fall. Approximately 30–60% of patients with symptomatic herniated disks have a history of a trauma or sports-­related injury. Other

Symptoms of intervertebral disk herniation or slipped vertebral apophysis in adolescents are similar to adult herniated disk symptoms. The
major complaint is back pain, present in nearly 90% of patients. Over
30% of patients complain of radicular symptoms or radiating sciatic-­
type pain into the legs. The back pain is often made worse by coughing, a Valsalva maneuver, or sitting. Pain may be relieved by standing
or back extension, which increases the disk space between vertebral
bodies. Providers should inquire about weight loss, fever, or other constitutional symptoms to rule out an infectious or neoplastic etiology.
On physical examination, both paraspinal muscle spasm and a generalized spinal stiffness are common. Patients may lean toward the unaffected side to increase the size of the affected neural foramen, thereby
partially relieving symptoms. This results in a reactive scoliosis—not a
true spinal curve—that improves with symptom resolution. Although
overt signs of neurologic involvement are absent in most patients, a
positive straight leg raise test, causing radicular pain to shoot down the
affected leg, is usually present. Pain is also worsened by spinal flexion.
It is critical to perform a full neurologic evaluation, including sensation to light touch, pinprick, and proprioception; muscle strength; and
reflexes. Providers must also evaluate for perineal numbness, or saddle
anesthesia. This finding, combined with changes in bowel or bladder
function, is indicative of cauda equina syndrome, a surgical emergency
in which the nerve roots at the caudal end of the spinal cord are compressed or damaged.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION

Radiographs often show loss of lumbar lordosis, which is due to muscle spasm, and sometimes a mild lumbar scoliosis. Other radiographic
findings include degenerative changes and a loss of intervertebral disk
height. MRI is the best study to establish the diagnosis of a disk herniation (Fig. 720.15). CT is especially helpful to visualize a partially ossified fragment associated with a slipped apophysis.

TREATMENT

The initial treatment is nonoperative in the vast majority of patients—
even if symptoms or findings of radiculopathy are observed. Treatment
focuses on rest, activity modification, NSAIDs, and physical therapy.
An orthosis may provide additional symptomatic relief. Complete
bed rest is not recommended. Epidural steroid injection (ESI) may be
discussed with patients after approximately 6 weeks of symptomatic
treatment if symptoms persist, though the evidence is not yet definitive. However, if patients elect to undergo an ESI, they should not have
more than a single injection if the first did not provide any relief. Clinical experience has demonstrated that multiple injections are no more
likely to provide relief than a single injection and expose patients to
additional risks of infection, scarring, and neural injury. If a patient
experiences substantial relief from an ESI and has a later recurrence of
symptoms, consideration may be given for a repeat injection after performing a complete physical exam and ruling out any new pathology.
Surgical treatment should be considered when nonoperative measures have failed or when a profound neurologic deficit such as cauda
equina syndrome is present or evolving. Unfortunately, children and
adolescents respond less favorably to nonoperative therapy compared
with adults, and a significant percentage will require surgical intervention. Although patients with disk herniation may improve with reduction in the local inflammatory response around the nerve root and also
as the disk material loses water volume and shrinks, which eliminates
mechanical compression, patients with symptomatic ring apophyseal
separations have a bony fragment causing their symptoms and are
unlikely to improve spontaneously.
The surgical technique involves removing a small area of the lamina
via a posterior approach, called a laminotomy, which allows exposure

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 720 u The Spine

4257

Fig. 720.15 Lumbar disk herniation.

A

Sagittal (A) and axial T2-­weighted (B)
images demonstrate a disk extrusion
at L5-­S1 level with near-­complete infilling of bilateral lateral recesses, left
greater than right, and effacement
of the thecal sac. (From Bosemani
T, Huisman TAGM. Spine imaging.
In: Walters MM, Robertson RL, eds.
Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites,
4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017:
Fig. 9.30, p. 345.)

B

of the neural elements and underlying disk. Any loose fragments are
removed. A bulging disk may also be opened surgically to decompress
the area compressing the neural elements, although a complete diskectomy is inadvisable. The surgical approach is similar in the case of a
slipped vertebral apophysis, in which fragments of bone and cartilage
must also be removed. This often requires a bilateral laminotomy to
completely address the pathology. Patients with congenital lumbar spinal stenosis may be more likely to require surgical treatment and also
may require a posterior decompression in addition to the discectomy.
The initial results are excellent in the majority of patients. Approximately 30% may have recurrent herniations and resultant symptoms
of back or leg pain at longer-­term follow-­up. These recurrences are
initially treated nonoperatively; however, repeat discectomy may be
required, and if so, a significant number of patients may require a
spinal arthrodesis to stabilize the damaged motion segment. A spinal
fusion may also be required for instability associated with spondylolisthesis or other etiology.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

720.9 Tumors
R. Justin Mistovich, Keith D. Baldwin, and
David A. Spiegel
Back pain may be the most common presenting complaint in children
who have a tumor involving the vertebral column or the spinal cord.
Other associated symptoms may include weakness of the lower extremities, scoliosis, and loss of sphincter control. The majority of tumors are
benign (see Chapter 550), including osteoid osteoma, osteoblastoma,
aneurysmal bone cyst, and eosinophilic granuloma. Malignant tumors
involving the vertebral column may be osseous, such as osteosarcoma
or Ewing sarcoma. They may involve the spinal cord and sympathetic
or parasympathetic nerves in cases of ganglioneuroma, ganglioneuroblastoma, and neuroblastoma. Tumors from other primary sites can
also metastasize to the spine.
High-­quality plain radiographs may show vertebra plana, or symmetric collapse of a single vertebra with preserved disk space; this
is most commonly seen with eosinophilic granuloma (Fig. 720.16).
Other useful imaging modalities include bone scans, which help with
localization and identification of other lesions; MRI, which is helpful

A

B

Fig. 720.16 (A) Lateral radiograph of the lumbar spine of a 6-­yr-­old

female with a painful osteolytic lesion of the L2 vertebral body with
vertebral plana deformity. CT-­
guided frozen section biopsy showed
eosinophilic granuloma; intralesional methylprednisolone injection was
performed. (B) Lateral radiograph of the lumbar spine shows complete
reconstitution of the lesion 7 years after diagnosis and treatment. (From
Angelini A, Mavrogenis AF, Rimondi E, et al. Current concepts for diagnosis and management of eosinophilic granuloma of bone. J Orthop
Traumatol. 2017;18:83-90. Fig. 3.)

to identify soft tissue extension and neurologic compression; and CT,
which provides excellent bony detail.
A biopsy is usually required to establish the diagnosis. Treatment of
tumors of the spinal column may require a multidisciplinary approach.
These cases should ideally be managed in centers with experience
in the care of patients with these lesions. Many lesions are surgically
treated by laminectomy, and postoperative surveillance is essential
to identify cases of post­laminectomy kyphosis or other spinal deformities, which when progressive may require an instrumented spinal
fusion to stabilize.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4258 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

Chapter 721

The Neck
R. Justin Mistovich, Keith D. Baldwin, and
David A. Spiegel
721.1 Torticollis
R. Justin Mistovich, Keith D. Baldwin, and
David A. Spiegel
Torticollis, literally meaning “twisted neck,” is not a diagnosis but
rather a clinical manifestation of a variety of underlying conditions
(Table 721.1). Common names associated with this condition include
“wry-­neck” and “cock-­robin” deformity. Although congenital muscular
torticollis is the most common diagnosis in cases presenting at or close
to the time of birth, the differential diagnosis for acquired torticollis
is large. Therefore a thorough evaluation is required to identify the
underlying cause.

associated with congenital muscular torticollis are absent or if the
deformity does not respond to the stretching treatment, because torticollis in infants may also be due to congenital vertebral anomalies.
Surgical release of the SCM is considered in patients with persistent
deformity after failure of conservative treatment. The muscle may be
released at its insertion on the clavicle (unipolar release) or at both its
origin and insertion (bipolar release). There is no agreement as to the
most appropriate time for the surgical release, but surgical treatment
is typically delayed until at least 18 months of age; some even suggest
waiting until the child is approaching school age. Although range of
motion can be improved after surgical release even during the teenage
years, remodeling of facial asymmetry and plagiocephaly may be less
predictable in patients older than infancy. Surgical management results
in satisfactory function and acceptable cosmesis in more than 90% of
patients; however, with early diagnosis and treatment, surgery should
be required in only a minority of cases. Patients who have residual or
untreated CMT beyond a year of age may develop secondary skeletal
abnormalities such as a mild cervicothoracic scoliosis or rotational
malalignment and tilting of upper and lower cervical vertebrae (especially at the atlantoaxial joint). It is presumed that such malalignment
will improve with release of contracture, but in older patients, skeletal
deformities may persist.

CONGENITAL MUSCULAR TORTICOLLIS

Congenital muscular torticollis (CMT) is due to a contracture of the
sternocleidomastoid (SCM) muscle, which results in a tilting of the
head and neck toward the side of the contracted muscle with rotation
of the head to the opposite side (Fig. 721.1). In most cases (75%), the
right SCM muscle is involved, causing the patient’s face and chin to
point to the left side.
CMT is thought to result from an intrauterine deformation or compression and is more common in children of primigravida mothers.
CMT may be associated with the presence of a palpable mass or nodule
of fibrous tissue within the substance of the SCM muscle in approximately 50% of cases (Figs. 721.2 and 721.3). Findings on muscle biopsies and MRI studies led to the hypothesis that SCM muscle injury
from compression or stretch may create localized ischemia, which
in turn results in fibrosis and subsequent contracture—essentially an
intramuscular compartment syndrome. In rare cases, the condition
can result from hereditary muscle aplasia.
Associated findings with CMT include plagiocephaly, facial asymmetry, and positional musculoskeletal deformities such as metatarsus
adductus (15%) and calcaneovalgus feet. Hip dysplasia may be identified in 8–20% of affected patients. In addition to routine screening
by physical examination for hip dysplasia, providers should consider
obtaining either an ultrasound at 6 weeks of age or a plain radiograph
of the pelvis at 4-6 months of age in children with CMT even if the
physical exam is normal and there are no other risk factors for DDH.
The cornerstone of treatment for CMT is physical therapy and a
home stretching program in which caregivers are instructed to gently
stretch the contracted SCM by rotating the infant’s chin to the ipsilateral shoulder and simultaneously tilting the head toward the contralateral shoulder. The best results occur when treatment is started
within the first 3 months of life, leading to resolution in nearly all cases.
Patients who start their physical therapy later can expect a more prolonged course, and a subset will not achieve a normal range of motion.
Recently, single frequency microcurrent has been used as an adjunct
to physical therapy with the goal of reducing the time of treatment
and also addressing the challenges of patients presenting at a later
age. Botulinum toxin injections may also be considered as an adjunct,
especially in resistant cases in older patients. Plagiocephaly commonly
accompanies CMT, and patients may be referred to a craniofacial clinic
or specialist for discussion of treatment with a cranial remolding helmet. Early restoration of motion reduces the likelihood that patients
will have persistent facial asymmetry or cranial molding abnormalities.
Although firm guidelines for imaging the cervical spine have not
been established, anteroposterior (AP) and lateral radiographs of
the cervical spine may be obtained when the typical clinical features

Table 721.1  Differential Diagnosis of Torticollis
CONGENITAL
Muscular torticollis
Positional deformation
Hemivertebra (cervical spine)
Unilateral atlanto-­occipital fusion
Klippel-­Feil syndrome
Unilateral absence of sternocleidomastoid
Pterygium colli
TRAUMA
Muscular injury (cervical muscles)
Fibromatosis coli (sternocleidomastoid tumor of infancy)
Atlanto-­occipital subluxation
Atlantoaxial subluxation
C2-3 subluxation
Rotary subluxation
Fractures
Foreign body
INFLAMMATION
Cervical lymphadenitis
Retropharyngeal abscess
Cervical vertebral osteomyelitis
Grisel syndrome (nontraumatic subluxation of the atlantoaxial joint
due to local inflammation)
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Lemierre syndrome
Upper lobe pneumonia
NEUROLOGIC
Visual disturbances (nystagmus, superior oblique or lateral rectus
paresis)
Dystonic drug reactions (phenothiazines, haloperidol,
metoclopramide)
Cervical cord tumor
Posterior fossa brain tumor
Syringomyelia
Wilson disease
Dystonia musculorum deformans
OTHER
Acute cervical disk calcification
Sandifer syndrome (gastroesophageal reflux, hiatal hernia)
Benign paroxysmal torticollis
Bone tumors (eosinophilic granuloma)
Soft tissue tumor
Psychogenic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 721 u The Neck

A

B

4259

C

Fig. 721.1 Congenital muscular torticollis. A, Torticollis secondary to a contracted left sternocleidomastoid (SCM) muscle. B, Mass in right SCM

(arrow) of a newborn. Note intrauterine folding deformity of the right ear. C, Flattening of the left occipital area and left ear formation resulting
from supine positioning of a child with right congenital torticollis. (From Johnson CE. Disorders of the neck. In: Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s Pediatric
Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig 8.6, p. 93.)

A
Fig. 721.2 Clinical presentation of a 2-­ × 2-­cm firm, left-­sided neck
mass. (From Baik G, Blask A, Reilly BK. Unilateral neck mass in a neonate. J Pediatr. 2018;202:329, Fig. 1.)

OTHER CAUSES OF TORTICOLLIS

The evaluation of torticollis becomes more complex when the typical
findings associated with CMT are absent, the usual clinical response
is not observed, or the deformity presents at a later age. In addition to
a careful history and physical examination, consultation with an ophthalmologist and neurologist will be helpful. Plain radiographs should
be obtained, and MRI of the brain and cervical spine will be required
in a subset of cases.
The differential diagnosis is extensive (see Table 721.1). Neurogenic torticollis is uncommon and results from tumors of the
posterior fossa or brainstem, syringomyelia, and Arnold-­Chiari
malformation. In addition to the neurologic examination, MRI of
the brain and cervical spine is required to establish the diagnosis.
Benign paroxysmal torticollis of infancy is also uncommon and
may be due to vestibular dysfunction. Episodes may last from minutes to days, and the side of the deformity may alternate. The condition is self-­limiting, and no specific treatment is required other
than ruling out other treatable causes. Torticollis may also be seen
in association with diskitis or vertebral osteomyelitis; juvenile idiopathic arthritis; cervical disk calcification; visual problems, such as
congenital nystagmus or paresis of the superior oblique or lateral
rectus muscle; benign or malignant bone tumors; and in cerebral
palsy and chronic gastroesophageal reflux from a hiatal hernia
(Sandifer syndrome).

B
Fig. 721.3 Sonographic image of the symptomatic left neck in a

3-­wk-­old neonate with fibromatosis colli of the left sternocleidomastoid muscle. A, Longitudinal image of the sternocleidomastoid muscle
showing enlargement with a fusiform configuration and masslike focus
within the expanded segment of the muscle (arrows). The echotexture
of the mass is mildly heterogenous and echogenic compared with the
normal muscle on the contralateral side. Color flow is preserved within
the mass. B, The mass has a more rounded configuration on the transverse ultrasound image (arrows). (From Baik G, Blask A, Reilly BK. Unilateral neck mass in a neonate. J Pediatr. 2018;202:329, Fig. 2.)

ATLANTOAXIAL ROTATORY DISPLACEMENT

Atlantoaxial rotatory displacement (AARD) represents a spectrum of
pathology involving axial alignment (rotational) and motion between
C1 and C2. The vertebrae may be partially displaced (subluxated)
or completely displaced (dislocated) in the neutral or resting position with head facing forward. Motion between the vertebrae may

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4260 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
be normal (reducible with full range of motion), “sticky” (partially
reducible with loss of motion), or fixed (irreducible with no motion
between C1 and C2). Loss of motion at the C1-­C2 joint results in 50%
loss of cervical rotation. Prompt diagnosis and treatment are essential as the malalignment may become irreducible after several weeks.
If the displacement persists, the facet of C2 will become deformed
(resulting in increased forward slope), which increases the risk of C1
facet sliding off of the C2 facet leading to relapse of deformity.
AARD may complicate infection or inflammation of the tissues of the
upper airway, neck, or pharynx (Grisel syndrome), minor traumatic injuries, and surgical procedures in the oropharynx, ear, or nose. The diagnosis
is most often made clinically, with the SCM muscle on the contralateral side
(away from the head tilt) in spasm and prominent. Additionally, patients
with AARD often have pain at rest and with head manipulation, features
not seen with CMT. Plain radiographs are difficult to interpret given the
head tilt, and AARD is best appreciated on a dynamic rotational CT scan,
in which axial images are obtained through the upper cervical spine with
the head at neutral and rotated maximally toward both the right and the
left. The patient must be relaxed and comfortable for images to be successfully obtained. MRI may demonstrate edema or inflammation of the
supporting ligaments. Clinicians may choose to treat a patient empirically
if the history and clinical findings are characteristic, reserving advanced
imaging for patients who have not responded clinically. If the patient is
seen within a few days of the onset of symptoms, a trial of analgesics and a
soft collar may be attempted. Patients with symptoms that persist or have
been present for more than a week are often admitted to the hospital for
analgesia, muscle relaxants, and a period of soft cervical traction. If this
fails to reduce the displacement, halo traction may be attempted. If the
joint can be reduced, patients are typically immobilized for at least 6 weeks
in a halo vest. The treatment course is more challenging and outcomes less
favorable for patients presenting more than 4 weeks after symptom onset.
In such cases traction is typically employed to reduce the joint and then a
halo vest used for up to 3-4 months to maintain the reduction. Some have
used manipulation under anesthesia to obtain reduction before manipulation. The longer period of immobilization in these chronic cases allows
for remodeling of the C2 facet, therefore reducing the risks of relapse
after treatment. For those who fail these nonoperative treatment strategies, the most common treatment is a C1-­C2 arthrodesis. A less common
approach has been to perform an open reduction of the joint followed by
either immobilization or by surgical fusion.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

A

B

721.2 Klippel-­Feil Syndrome
R. Justin Mistovich, Keith D. Baldwin, and
David A. Spiegel
Klippel-­Feil syndrome (KFS) includes the classic triad of a low posterior hairline, short neck, and decreased cervical range of motion
(Fig. 721.4). However, these clinical findings are present in <50% of
patients with KFS. Limited cervical motion may be the most common
finding, present in 64.5% of patients, whereas only 9.7% of patients had
all three findings. Patients have a congenital fusion (failure of segmentation) of one or more cervical motion segments at the craniocervical junction and/or in the subaxial spine and often have additional
associated congenital anomalies of the cervical spine and other organ
systems.
Additional findings in the cervical spine include occipitocervical
synostosis, odontoid abnormalities, basilar invagination (proximal
migration of the C2 vertebra above the foramen magnum), and Chiari malformation. Other associations include Sprengel’s deformity
(congenital elevation of the scapula), congenital scoliosis, genitourinary anomalies (25–35%), sensorineural hearing loss (5%), and congenital heart disease (5–10%). Renal abnormalities include double
collecting systems, renal aplasia, and horseshoe kidney. The cervical
spine anomalies seen in patients with KFS may also be seen with Goldenhar syndrome, Mohr syndrome, VACTERL syndrome, and fetal
alcohol syndrome. Clinical problems are more common in adults and
include pain or neurologic symptoms from spinal instability or stenosis. Although the incidence has been estimated at 1 in 40,000-42,000
births, many patients with this condition are undiagnosed

ETIOLOGY AND CLASSIFICATION

Most cases are sporadic, but four genetic forms have been described,
two of which are autosomal dominant and two are autosomal recessive.
A number of chromosomal abnormalities have also been associated
with KFS. Pathogenic variants have been reported in the mesenchymal
homeobox 1 gene (MEOX1, regulates segmentation of vertebrae), the
growth differentiating factor 3 or 6 genes (GDF), and the myosin 18
(MYO18B) gene.
One classification system is the most practical and has three types,
namely a single fused segment (I), multiple noncontiguous fusions (II),
and multiple contiguous fused segments (III). Patients with type I tend
to have axial pain, whereas while those with types II/III are more likely
to have neurologic symptoms.

C

Fig. 721.4 Clinical picture of a 5-­yr-­old with Klippel-­Feil syndrome. A, Note short neck and low hairline. B and C, Radiographs of the cervical spine

(B, flexion; C, extension) demonstrate congenital fusion and evidence of spinal instability (arrow). (From Drummond DS. Pediatric cervical instability.
In: Weisel SE, Boden DS, Wisnecki RI, eds. Seminars in Spine Surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1996;292–309.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 721 u The Neck
CLINICAL PRESENTATION

KFS is present at birth but does not usually become clinically
apparent until the second or third decades. Patients at this point
present with pain, loss of motion, or neurologic symptoms. Pain
is extremely common by adulthood and may be referred to the
neck, occiput, and shoulders/upper back. The source of discomfort
may be musculoskeletal and/or neurologic. The pain is greater in
patients with more extensive involvement. Headache, dizziness, and
fatigue have also been reported. Given that the same physiologic
stresses are applied to a smaller number of mobile spinal segments,
patients are at risk for the development of hypermobility and often
instability, especially at motion segments adjacent to the fused vertebrae. Weakness or clumsiness consistent with myelopathy may be
the presenting symptoms.

Table 721.2  Causes of Pediatric Cervical Instability
CAUSES

SUBTYPES

Congenital

Cranio-­occipital defects (occipital vertebrae,
basilar impression, occipital dysplasias,
condylar hypoplasia, occipitalized atlas)
Atlantoaxial defects (aplasia of atlas arch,
aplasia of odontoid process)
Subaxial anomalies (failure of
segmentation and/or fusion, spina bifida,
spondylolisthesis)
Syndromic disorders (e.g., Down syndrome,
Klippel-­Feil syndrome, 22q11.2 deletion
syndrome, Larsen syndrome, Marfan
syndrome, Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome)

PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

A comprehensive musculoskeletal and neurologic examination is
required, given associated anomalies in the musculoskeletal and
visceral systems. Scoliosis is present in more than 50% of patients
with KFS, and congenital anomalies may be identified in other
regions of the spine as well. The neurologic exam focuses on identifying any signs of radiculopathy or myelopathy. Spinal cord compression, or myelopathy, may result from stenosis or instability. A
physical exam will demonstrate upper motor neuron signs such as
hyperreflexia, Hoffman’s sign, Babinski’s sign, and sustained clonus,
with more than three beats considered pathologic. Nerve root compression, or radiculopathy, may be due to stenosis and is identified
by weakness or decreased sensation in the muscles or dermatomes
served by a particular nerve root.

RADIOLOGIC INVESTIGATION

Initial radiologic evaluation should include an AP, lateral, and
oblique view of the cervical spine. The characteristic finding is a
congenital fusion of two or more vertebrae resulting from a failure of segmentation; however, multiple vertebrae may be involved.
Because congenital anomalies may exist in more than one region of
the spine, radiographs of the thoracic and lumbosacral spine should
be routinely obtained. Flexion-­extension lateral views of the cervical spine may help to identify segments with excessive motion.
Referral to an orthopedist is appropriate once the diagnosis is established. Patients with this condition usually undergo CT and MRI
of the spine to accurately characterize the bony anomalies and also
identify any coexisting neural pathology. A renal ultrasound is routinely obtained to identify associated anomalies (e.g., duplicated
collecting system, absence of a kidney, horseshoe kidney). Additional imaging, such as echocardiogram, may identify cardiovascular anomalies, mainly septal defects.
Audiologic evaluation is indicated for patients diagnosed with KFS;
hearing impairment may be identified in up to one third of affected
patients.

TREATMENT

The three patterns commonly associated with instability include (1)
C2/C3 fusion with occipitocervical synostosis, (2) extensive fusion
over multiple levels with an abnormal occipitocervical junction, and
(3) two fused segments separated by an open joint space.
Pain may often be controlled by activity restriction, intermittent
immobilization, or other nonoperative modalities. Patients who are
chronically symptomatic, have instability with positive neurologic
symptoms or exam findings, or are thought to be at increased risk
for neurologic deterioration are candidates for surgical treatment.
Operative interventions include decompression of nerve roots or
the spinal cord itself and/or spinal fusion to address cervical spinal
instability.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

4261

Acquired

Trauma
Infection (pyogenic/granulomatous)
Tumor (including neurofibromatosis)
Inflammatory conditions (e.g., juvenile
idiopathic arthritis)
Osteochondrodysplasias (e.g.,
achondroplasia, diastrophic dysplasia,
metatropic dysplasia, spondyloepiphyseal
dysplasia)
Storage disorders (e.g.,
mucopolysaccharidoses)
Metabolic disorders (rickets)
Miscellaneous (including osteogenesis
imperfecta, after surgery)

721.3 Cervical Anomalies and Instabilities
R. Justin Mistovich, Keith D. Baldwin, and
David A. Spiegel
Anomalies of the craniovertebral junction or lower cervical spine
may be seen in isolation or in association with other conditions.
These include genetic syndromes, skeletal dysplasias, connective
tissue disorders, and metabolic disorders. These anomalies may
be congenital or developmental. Although most anomalies remain
asymptomatic and undiagnosed, a subset will place the patient at
risk of neurologic injury as a result of instability or spinal canal
stenosis. The most frequently encountered causes of cervical spine
instability in children can be categorized etiologically (Table 721.2).
Patients with conditions that have known associations involving the
cervical spine should have a complete evaluation, including history,
physical examination, and initial radiographic examination. Lateral radiographs in flexion and extension may be helpful to evaluate instability, and advanced imaging such as CT or MRI may be
required to further characterize any abnormalities noted on plain
radiographs.
Patients may complain of neck pain or neurologic symptoms.
Radicular symptoms include pain, weakness, and numbness within
the distribution of a nerve root. Myelopathic symptoms include generalized weakness, gait disturbance, increased fatigue with ambulation, upper extremity clumsiness, and abnormalities in bowel or
bladder function. Other symptoms such as headaches, dizziness, or
vertigo have also been described. Physical exam findings may include
restricted cervical mobility, cervical tenderness or spasm, and neurologic abnormalities.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4262 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Although the upper cervical spine has limited flexion and extension, roughly 50% of cervical rotation occurs at the atlantoaxial
(C1-2) joint. The main constraints to motion in the upper cervical spine are soft tissue (ligaments and joint capsules) rather than
osseous. Excessive motion or instability may result in a compressive injury to the brainstem or spinal cord. Anomalies at the craniovertebral junction include congenital fusion of the occiput to C1
(occipitalization of the atlas), basilar impression and invagination
(proximal migration of the C2 vertebra as the result of softening
of the bones and with normal bones, respectively), and accessory
vertebrae. Aplasia or hypoplasia of the atlas or the axis may result in
atlantoaxial instability.

Down Syndrome

OS ODONTOIDEUM

Os odontoideum is the most common anomaly of the odontoid,
or dens, and radiographically appears as an oval-­shaped, well-­
corticated bony ossicle that is positioned cephalad to the body of
the axis. There is a discontinuity, and the upper portion of the dens
moves with the ring of C1, narrowing the space available for the
spinal cord and placing it at risk for injury. The body of the dens is
mesenchymal in origin and originates from the first cervical vertebra. Subsequent separation allows it to then fuse with the C2 vertebra. It is formed by two separate ossification centers, one on either
side of the midline that eventually fuse and are visible at birth. The
os odontoideum may be in a normal anatomic position (orthotopic)
or adjacent to the occipital bone (dystopic). Although the etiology
remains unclear, both traumatic (nonunion of a fracture, repetitive
shear stresses from hypermobility on growing cartilage) and developmental (failure of fusion of the ossification centers) theories have
been proposed.
Symptoms may include pain and/or neurologic dysfunction.
Myelopathy may develop from neural stretch, ischemia, or bony
impingement, whereas vertebrobasilar findings may result from
ischemia due to stretching or thrombosis of the vertebral arteries. Neurologic examination may reveal a combination of both
upper and lower motor neuron signs. Some patients are completely
asymptomatic with the anomaly noted incidentally on a lateral cervical spine radiograph.

A

The radiographic evaluation begins with AP, lateral, and open
mouth odontoid views, which may be supplemented by flexion
and extension lateral radiographs. CT provides the best bony detail
and is useful in defining each anomaly. MRI, including dynamic
images in flexion and extension, is best for evaluating neurologic
impingement.
Patients who are asymptomatic with no instability may be managed by observation with serial radiographs, activity restriction,
and taking special precautions if they require intubation/general
anesthesia. Those with neurologic symptoms and instability require
surgical stabilization by an instrumented posterior arthrodesis
between C1 and C2.

B

Ligamentous hyperlaxity is a characteristic feature of Down syndrome and may result in hypermobility or instability at the occipitoatlantal or the atlantoaxial joints in 4–30% of patients (see
Chapter 57). These patients may also have coexisting congenital or
developmental anomalies of the cervical spine, such as occipitalization of the atlas, atlantal arch hypoplasia, basilar invagination, and
os odontoideum.
Although the natural history of this spectrum of pathology remains
unknown, a small subset of patients will develop instability with neurologic dysfunction. The clinical diagnosis of neurologic dysfunction
may be challenging because patients often present with subtle findings such as decreased exercise tolerance, tripping/falling, or other
gait abnormalities. The challenge lies in the early identification of such
cases, especially in patients who plan to participate in activities with
increased risk of trauma to the head or neck such as tumbling or other
sports.
All patients with Down syndrome require screening by history
and physical examination at regular intervals. The guidelines for
health supervision for children with Down syndrome suggest that
routine radiographic screening is not indicated in asymptomatic
patients and that a lateral radiograph in neutral alignment should
be obtained for all patients with symptoms of possible atlantoaxial
instability (neck pain, radicular pain, weakness, spasticity/change
in tone, gait difficulties, hyperreflexia, or change in bowel or bladder function). Dynamic images are suggested when abnormalities

C

Fig. 721.5 Flexion (A) and extension (B) radiographs of a case of Down syndrome demonstrating atlanto-­occipital hypermobility and subluxation.
C, Instability and symptoms were relieved by an occipitoaxial arthrodesis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 722 u The Upper Limb

A

4263

C

B

Fig. 721.6 Radiographs of the cervical spine in a child with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome showing evidence of platybasia, occipitocervical, and

atlantoaxial instability. A, Neutral radiograph. B, Flexion. C, Extension. (From Drummond DS. Pediatric cervical instability. In: Weisel SE, Boden DS,
Wisnecki RI, eds. Seminars in Spine Surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1996:292–309.)

are present on the initial lateral radiograph. Although variations
in practice patterns likely exist and recommendations may vary
between states, radiographic screening is required before participation in the Special Olympics. Patients with coexisting os odontoideum are candidates for routine radiographic surveillance because
they are at greater risk for progression of displacement and neurologic injury.
Plain radiographs are ideally obtained in children older than 3
years unless clinical findings mandate earlier evaluation, consisting
of an AP and lateral in neutral alignment, usually supplemented by
a lateral view in flexion and extension. The atlanto-­dens interval
(ADI) is used to evaluate the relationship between C1 and C2 (atlantoaxial joint) and is measured as the space between the dens and the
anterior ring of C1 on lateral radiographs in neutral, flexion, and
extension (Fig. 721.5). Although the ADI should be 3 mm or less in
the population without Down syndrome, a normal ADI in children
with Down syndrome is <4.5 mm. Hypermobility is diagnosed as
an ADI between 6 and 10 mm, whereas an ADI >10 mm represents frank instability and carries greater risk of neurologic injury.
Evaluating the space available for the spinal cord is also important,
and a measurement of ≤14 mm between the posterior odontoid and
posterior arch is felt to be abnormal. Progression from hypermobility to instability on surveillance radiographs is uncommon. In one
series of patients with Down syndrome screened routinely, an ADI
of ≥6 mm was identified in 4.4%, and 1.6% were noted to progress
to hypermobility/instability over 4 years. MRI in flexion and extension is indicated to evaluate for impingement and/or neurologic
injury in patients with appropriate clinical symptoms or findings
and/or those with radiographic instability, and an increase in signal
intensity within the spinal cord at the level of excessive motion is
diagnostic of neurologic injury.
Although hypermobility at the occipitoatlantal joint is present in
>50% of children with Down syndrome, most patients do not develop
instability or neurologic symptoms. The relationships at this articulation are difficult to measure reliably on plain radiographs. An MRI in
flexion and extension is required to evaluate any questionable radiographic findings, especially in the presence of clinical symptoms.
Involvement of the subaxial spine is less common and is typically
encountered in the adult population of patients with Down syndrome.
Degenerative changes or instability may result in pain, radiculopathy,
and/or myelopathy.
Specific treatment recommendations have not been standardized,
but patients diagnosed with hypermobility may be restricted from
participation in contact sports and other activities that increase the
risk of trauma to the cervical spine. Patients with C1-2 instability

with or without neurologic findings are candidates for an atlantoaxial
fusion.

22Q11.2 Deletion Syndrome

The chromosome deletion of 22q11.2 is a common genetic syndrome, with an overall prevalence of 1 in 5,950 births and encompasses a wide spectrum of abnormalities. There are characteristic
facial features, cleft palate, and cardiac anomalies. Cervical spine
anomalies are also common. At least one developmental variation
of the occiput or cervical spine is noted in all patients. The occipital
variations observed include platybasia, an abnormal flattening of
the base of the skull, and basilar impression. Variations in anatomy
of C1 include dysmorphic shape, an open posterior arch, and occipitalization, while axis variations include a dysmorphic dens and “C2
swoosh” (upswept lamina and posterior elements). A range of cervical vertebral fusions is noted in these patients, the most common
being at the C2-3 level. Increased segmental motion is commonly
observed, but symptomatic instability is quite uncommon. With
frequent occurrence of upper cervical spine anomalies in patients
with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (Fig. 721.6), advanced imaging of
the upper cervical spine is suggested to characterize the anomalies. Regular follow-­up is required as a small subset of patients may
develop instability. A flexion-­extension MRI of the cervical spine
may be considered for evaluation of symptomatic patients to rule
out instability and/or neurologic injury.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 722

The Upper Limb
Robert B. Carrigan
SHOULDER

The shoulder is a ball-­and-­socket joint that is similar to the hip; however, there are several anatomic differences between the two. The
shoulder is a very shallow ball-­and-­socket joint compared to the hip
and is more prone to dislocation than the hip. In addition, shoulder

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4264 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
range of motion (ROM) is much greater than that of the hip. This is
due to the size of the humeral head relative to the glenoid and the
presence of scapulothoracic motion. The shoulder positions the hand
along the surface of a theoretical sphere in space, with its center at the
glenohumeral joint.

Sprengel Deformity

Sprengel deformity, or congenital elevation of the scapula, is a
disorder of development that involves a high scapula and limited
scapulothoracic motion. The scapula originates in early embryogenesis at a level posterior to the fourth cervical vertebra. It
descends during development to below the seventh cervical vertebra. Failure of this descent, either unilateral or bilateral, is the
Sprengel deformity. The severity of the deformity depends on the
location of the scapula and associated anomalies. The scapula in
mild cases is simply rotated, with a palpable or visible bump corresponding to the superomedial corner of the scapula. Function is
generally good. In moderate cases, the scapula is higher on the neck
and connected to the spine with an abnormal omovertebral ligamentous or bony connection. Shoulder motion, particularly abduction, is limited. In severe cases, the scapula is small and positioned
on the posterior neck. The neck may be webbed. Most patients with
Sprengel deformity have associated anomalies of the musculoskeletal system, especially in the spine (Klippel-­Feil syndrome), making spinal evaluation important.

Treatment

In mild cases, treatment is generally unnecessary. A prominent and
unsightly superomedial corner of the scapula can be excised. In more
severe cases, surgical repositioning of the scapula with rebalancing
of parascapular muscles can significantly improve both function and
appearance.

Congenital Pseudarthrosis of the Clavicle

The clavicle is a tubular S-­shaped bone that articulates with the
sternum and acromion. It acts as a strut to keep the shoulder from
protracting forward. Congenital pseudoarthrosis of the clavicle is a
failure of the two primary ossification centers of the clavicle to fuse
during embryogenesis (Fig. 722.1). The condition presents exclusively on the right side and may be confused for an acute clavicle
fracture sustained during birth. A thorough history and physical
exam will help to distinguish between the two conditions. Although
both a birth-­related clavicle fracture and a congenital pseudoarthrosis will present with a bump or prominence over the mid-­
clavicle, a birth-­related clavicle fracture will be tender to palpation
on exam. The parents may also report that the child is fussy with
feeding and changing. Congenital pseudoarthrosis of the clavicle
will be painless on exam. Radiographically the congenital pseudoarthrosis clavicle will have two rounded edges at the midportion
with signs of hypertrophy.

Treatment

There is not a clear consensus regarding treatment of congenital
pseudoarthrosis of the clavicle. Surgery is indicated for patients with
symptoms of thoracic outlet syndrome (impingement of the clavicle on the brachial plexus and subclavian vessels). However, most
patients are asymptomatic with few functional limitations and do
not require surgical repair. Surgical treatment may be considered for
patients with unacceptable cosmetic deformity, pain, or functional
deficits.
The operative treatment of congenital pseudoarthrosis of the
clavicle consists of opening the pseudoarthrosis site, preserving the
periosteum, debriding the hypertrophic ends, bone grafting, and
stabilization.

ELBOW

The elbow is the most congruent joint in the body. The stability of the
elbow is imparted via this bony congruity and through the medial and
radial collateral ligaments. Where the shoulder positions the hand
along the surface of a theoretical sphere, the elbow positions the hand
within that sphere. The elbow allows extension and flexion through the
ulnohumeral articulation and pronation and supination through the
radiocapitellar articulation.

Panner Disease and Osteochondritis of the
Capitellum

Panner disease is a disruption of the blood flow to the subchondral
bone and articular cartilage of the capitellum (Fig. 722.2). It typically occurs in males between the ages of 5 and 13 years. Presenting symptoms include lateral elbow pain, loss of motion, and, in
advanced cases, mechanical symptoms of the elbow (loose bodies).
The mechanism of injury can be impaction or overloading of the
joint, as seen with sports such as gymnastics and baseball. It can
also be idiopathic. Radiographs of the elbow may be normal or may
show a small lucency within the subchondral bone of the capitellum. MRI is the study of choice to evaluate a suspected capitellar
lesion. MRI can demonstrate the extent of the involvement in the
subchondral bone and the integrity of the cartilage of the articular
surface.

Treatment

Treatment is typically conservative. Rest, activity modification, and
patient education are initial treatment options. In cases in which the
articular cartilage fragments and loose bodies form, arthroscopy of
the elbow is warranted to remove the loose bodies. When the cartilage defect in the capitellum is large and symptomatic, procedures for
restoration of the articular cartilage may be considered. These procedures include drilling of the subchondral bone (microfracture) to
promote scar cartilage and osteochondral autograft transplantation
(OATS).

Radial Longitudinal Deficiency

Radial longitudinal deficiency of the forearm comprises a spectrum
of conditions and diseases that have resulted in hypoplasia or absence
of the radius (Table 722.1). Clinical characteristics consist of a small,
shortened limb with the hand and wrist in excessive radial deviation.
Partial or complete absence of the radial structures of the forearm and
hand are observed (Fig. 722.3).
Radial longitudinal deficiency can range in severity from mild to
severe and has been classified into four types according to Bayne and
Klug (Table 722.2). Radial longitudinal deficiency can be associated
with other syndromes such as Holt-­Oram and Fanconi anemia. Complete and thorough workup of these associated conditions is important
for the long-­term health of the child.

Treatment
Fig. 722.1 Radiograph of congenital pseudoarthrosis of the clavicle.

The goals for the treatment of radial longitudinal deficiency include
centralizing the hand and wrist on the forearm, balancing the wrist,
and maintaining appropriate thumb and digital motion. Shortly after

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 722 u The Upper Limb

A

B

Fig. 722.2 T1 (A) and T2 (B) coronal MRI images of the elbow depicting Panner disease of the elbow.

Table 722.1  Syndromes Commonly Associated with
Radial Deficiency
SYNDROME

CHARACTERISTICS

Holt-­Oram syndrome

Heart defects, most commonly atrial
septal defects
Absent thumb or long finger-­like
thumb

Thrombocytopenia-­absent
radius syndrome

Thrombocytopenia present at birth
but improves over time
Thumbs present, radii absent

VACTERL association

Vertebral abnormalities, anal
atresia, cardiac abnormalities,
tracheoesophageal fistula,
esophageal atresia, renal defects,
radial dysplasia, lower limb
abnormalities

Fanconi anemia

Aplastic anemia does not present
at birth, develops about 6 yr of
age; fatal without bone marrow
transplant
Chromosomal breakage challenge
test and genetic testing available
for early diagnosis
Thumb hypoplasia but present

From Trumble T, Budoff J, Cornwall R, eds. Core Knowledge in Orthopedics: Hand,
Elbow, Shoulder. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2005:425.

4265

dislocation of the radial head. The proximal end of the radius, or
radial head, is anchored to the proximal ulna by the annular ligament. It wraps around like a leash from the ulna, around the radial
head, and back to the ulna. If the radius is pulled distally, the annular ligament can slip proximally off the radial head and into the
joint between the radial head and the humerus (Fig. 722.4). The
injury is typically produced when a longitudinal traction force is
applied to the arm, such as when a falling child is caught by the
hand, or when a child is pulled by the hand. The injury usually
occurs in toddlers and rarely occurs in children older than 5 years
of age. Subluxation of the annular ligament produces immediate
pain and limitation of supination. Flexion and extension of the
elbow are not limited. Swelling is generally absent. The diagnosis
is made by history and physical examination because radiographs
are typically normal.

Treatment

The annular ligament is reduced by rotating the forearm into supination while holding pressure over the radial head. A palpable click
or clunk can be felt. The child recovers active supination and usually
has relief of discomfort. Sometimes pain may persist after reduction
maneuvers. Immobilization is not required, but recurrence can happen. Parents should avoid activities that apply traction to the elbows.
Parents can learn reduction maneuvers for recurrent episodes to avoid
trips to the emergency department or pediatrician’s office. Recurrence
beyond 5 years of age is rare.

WRIST

The wrist is composed of the two forearm bones (radius and ulna)
as well as the eight carpal bones. The wrist allows flexion, extension, and radial and ulnar deviation through the radiocarpal and
midcarpal articulations. Pronation and supination occur at the
wrist through the distal radial ulnar joint (DRUJ). The wrist is a
complex joint with numerous ligamentous and soft tissue attachments. It has complex kinematics that allows for its generous ROM,
but when these kinematics are altered, significant dysfunction can
occur.

Madelung Deformity

Madelung deformity is a deformity of the wrist that is characterized
as radial and palmar angulations of the distal aspect of the radius
(Fig. 722.5). Growth arrest of the palmar and ulnar aspect of the
distal radial physis is the underlying cause of this deformity. Bony
physeal lesions and an abnormal radiolunate ligament (Vicker’s
ligament) have been implicated. The deformity can be bilateral and
affects females more than males.

Treatment

birth, stretching and splinting of the wrist and hand should be started
to elongate the contracted radial soft tissues.
Surgery for correction of the wrist deformity is focused on addressing the tight structures and varies by age and level of involvement. The
classic surgical technique for children with good elbow motion is centralization of the wrist on the forearm, which is often associated with
recurrence of the deformity. When considering a centralization procedure, the preoperative plan begins with careful examination of the
patient; considerations regarding thumb and elbow function must be
made before surgery. The surgery typically occurs when the child is 1
year of age. Correction of the radial deviation as well as centralization
of the wrist can be accomplished with a variety of different surgical
techniques. These techniques include open release, capsular reefing,
and tendon rebalancing. External fixation techniques and free tissue
transfers also have been described.

Treatment of Madelung deformity is typically observation. Mild deformities can be observed until skeletal maturity. Moderate to severe
deformities that either are painful or limit function may be candidates
for surgical intervention. Surgical treatment for Madelung deformity
is often motivated by appearance. Patients and their families may be
concerned about the palmar angulation of the wrist and the resulting
prominent distal ulna.
There are a multitude of surgical options for treating Madelung
deformity. For the skeletally immature patient, resection of the tethering soft tissue (Vicker’s ligament) and physiolysis (fat grafting of any
bony lesion seen within the physis) is often the first option. When
Madelung deformity is encountered in skeletally mature patients,
an osteotomy may be considered. Dorsal closing wedge, dome, and
ulnar shortening osteotomies may be used alone or in combination to
achieve the desired result.
Long-­term considerations of Madelung deformity concern the
incongruity of the DRUJ and resulting premature DRUJ arthritis.

Nursemaid’s Elbow

Gymnast’s Wrist

Nursemaid’s elbow is a subluxation and interposition of the annular ligament of the elbow. It is often confused for a subluxation or

Gymnast’s wrist refers to the changes observed in the physis of the distal radius in the setting of repetitive stress associated with gymnastics

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4266 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

C

B

A

D

E

Fig. 722.3 Spectrum of phenotypes of radial dysplasia. A, Type 1 radius with a hypoplastic thumb. B, Type IV radius with an absent thumb. C,
Radiograph of a type IV radius. D and E, Phocomelic radial deficiency. (From Oishi S, Stutz C, Lake A. Disorders of the upper extremity. In: Herring
JA, ed. Tachdjian’s Pediatric Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 12.72, p. 337.)

Table 722.2  Modified Classification of Radial Longitudinal Deficiency
TYPE

THUMB

CARPUS

DISTAL RADIUS

PROXIMAL RADIUS

N

Hypoplastic or absent

Normal

Normal

Normal

0

Hypoplastic or absent

Absence, hypoplasia, or coalition

Normal

Normal, radioulnar synostosis,
or congenital dislocation of
the radial head

1

Hypoplastic or absent

Absence, hypoplasia, or coalition

>2 mm shorter than the
ulna

Normal, radioulnar synostosis,
or congenital dislocation of
the radial head

2

Hypoplastic or absent

Absence, hypoplasia, or coalition

Hypoplasia

Hypoplasia

3

Hypoplastic or absent

Absence, hypoplasia, or coalition

Physis absent

Variable hypoplasia

4

Hypoplastic or absent

Absence, hypoplasia, or coalition

Absent

Absent

From James MA, McCarroll HR Jr, Manske PR. The spectrum of radial longitudinal deficiency: a modified classification. J Hand Surg Am. 1999;24:1145–1155.

(Fig. 722.6). Symptoms include pain with weight bearing, swelling, and
loss of motion (mainly wrist extension). The pain is typically mild at
first and worsens with time and increased activity. Children will have
pain over the distal radial physis on palpation. The child should also
be examined for coexisting wrist pathology including DRUJ instability
and triangular fibrocartilage complex (TFCC) tears. Radiographs are
often normal but may show chronic changes in the distal radial physis,
including widening, sclerosis, and partial physeal arrest. Ulnar positive
variance may also be observed because of partial growth arrest of the
radius. MRI may be useful to examine the extent of physeal involvement as well as TFFC pathology

Treatment

Treatment of gymnast’s wrist begins with rest. Typically, the child is
prohibited from weight-­bearing activities for a period of 6 weeks or
until symptoms resolve. The child is slowly progressed back to their
routine. If symptoms return during the recovery phase, rest is reinitiated. It is not uncommon for relapses to occur when returning to competition. This may be difficult for the child and parents to understand,
as gymnasts and gymnast’s families are often very motivated to continue their sport. Use of braces, such as Tiger Paws, may help limit the
amount of force transmitted to the wrist and in turn help with injury
prevention.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 722 u The Upper Limb

4267

In cases where significant damage is seen in the distal radius physis,
surgery may be indicated to prevent future morphologic changes in
the wrist. Surgery may include epiphysiodesis of the radius and ulna,
shortening of the ulna, and TFCC repair.

Capitellum

Ganglion
Radial
head

Annular
ligament

Fig. 722.4 Nursemaid’s elbow. Illustration depicting subluxation of

the radial head inferior to the annular ligament, with interposition of the
ligament to the radiocapitellar joint space. This entity is sometimes in
the differential in the setting of upper extremity injury in a small child.
Radiographs are negative and serve only to exclude the presence of
bony injury when the diagnosis is not clear. (From Walters MM, Robertson RL, eds. Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites, 4th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2017: Fig. 7.102.)

The wrist joint articulation is lubricated with synovial fluid, which is
produced by the synovial lining of the joint and maintained within the
joint by the joint capsule. A defect in the capsule can allow fluid to leak
from the joint into the soft tissues, resulting in a ganglion. The term
cyst is a misnomer, because this extraarticular collection of fluid does
not have its own true lining. The defect in the capsule can occur as
a traumatic event, although trauma is rarely a feature of the presenting history. The fluid usually exits the joint in the interval between the
scaphoid and lunate, resulting in a ganglion located at the dorsoradial
aspect of the wrist. Ganglia can occur at other locations, such as the
volar aspect of the wrist, or in the palm because of leakage of fluid
from the flexor tendon sheaths. Pain is not commonly associated with
ganglia in children, and when it is, it is unclear whether the cyst is the
cause of the pain. The diagnosis is usually evident on physical examination, especially if the lesion transilluminates. Extensor tenosynovitis
and anomalous muscles can mimic ganglion cysts, but radiography or
MRI is not routinely required. Ultrasonography is an effective, noninvasive tool to support the diagnosis and reassure the patient and family.

Treatment

Regarding the treatment of ganglia in children, consider the vowels
AEIOU.
Aspiration: Simple aspiration of the fluid has a high recurrence rate
and is painful for children given the large-­bore needle required to
aspirate the gelatinous fluid. However, in older children who would
like to try and decompress the cyst before considering surgery, this
may be reasonable.
Excision: Surgical excision, including excision of the stalk connecting
the ganglion to its joint of origin, has a high success rate, although
the ganglion can recur.
Injection: Aspiration of the cyst and a simultaneous injection of a corticosteroid have been shown to be effective in treating recurrence in
children.
Observation: Up to 80% of ganglia in children <10 years of age resolve
spontaneously within 1 year of being noticed. If the ganglion is painful or bothersome and the child is >10 years of age, treatment may
be warranted.
Ultrasound: For children’s parents who are concerned about the mass
and want a radiographic study to confirm the diagnosis, ultrasound
is a noninvasive test to confirm the diagnosis.

HAND
Fig. 722.5 Radiograph of an adolescent with Madelung deformity.

The hand and fingers allow for complex and fine manipulations. An
intricate balance among extrinsic flexors, extensors, and intrinsic

A

C

B

D

Fig. 722.6 Gymnast’s wrist. A and B, Posteroanterior radiographs of the bilateral wrists show widening and irregularity of the distal radial physis.

Abnormal linear lucency is seen in the metaphyses, with surrounding sclerosis noted. Findings reflect disrupted growth at the physes. C, Coronal T1
and D, coronal T2 magnetic resonance images with fat saturation show similar abnormality at the distal radial physis, along with abnormal increased
fluid signal along the metaphysis. (From Walters MM, Robertson RL, eds. Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017:
Fig. 7.107.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4268 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 722.3  Classification of Camptodactyly
TYPE

CHARACTERISTICS

I

Congenital, no sex bias, small finger only

II

Acquired between 7-11 yr, typically progressive

III

Severe, significant contracture, bilateral and associated
with other musculoskeletal syndromes

Adapted from Kozin SH. Pediatric hand surgery. In: Beredjiklian PK, Bozentka DJ, eds.
Review of Hand Surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2004:223–245.

muscles allows these complex motions to occur. Congenital anomalies
of the hand and upper extremity rank just behind cardiac anomalies in
incidence. Like cardiac anomalies, if they are not properly identified
and remedied, may have long-­term consequences.

Camptodactyly

Camptodactyly is a nontraumatic flexion contracture of the proximal
interphalangeal joint that is often progressive. The small and ring fingers are most often affected. Bilateralism is observed two thirds of the
time. The etiology of camptodactyly is varied. Several different hypotheses have been offered as to the cause of this condition. Camptodactyly
can be divided into three different types (Table 722.3).

Treatment

Nonsurgical treatment is the primary treatment of camptodactyly.
Mild contractures of less than 30 degrees are usually well tolerated and
do not need treatment. Serial casting or static and dynamic splinting
can prevent contractures from worsening.
Surgical treatment is limited to the treatment of severe contractures. At the time of surgery, all contracted and anomalous structures are released. Results of contracture release for camptodactyly
are mixed; often a loss of flexion results from an attempt to improve
extension.

Clinodactyly

Angular deformity of the digit in the coronal plane, distal to the
metacarpophalangeal joint is clinodactyly. The most observed finding is a mild radial deviation of the small finger at the level of the
distal interphalangeal joint. This is often due to a triangular or trapezoidal middle phalanx. In some cases, a disruption of the physis at
the middle phalanx produces a longitudinal epiphysial bracket. This
bracket is thought to be the underlying cause for the formation of the
“delta phalanx” that is often observed in clinodactyly. Clinodactyly
has been observed in other fingers, including the thumb (Fig. 722.7)
and ring finger.

Treatment

The initial treatment for clinodactyly is observation. For severe deformities and for those affecting the thumb, surgery may be indicated.
Surgery is technically demanding. Bracket resections, corrective osteotomies, and growth plate ablations are the most common procedures
performed to correct the observed angular deformities. Results are
good, and recurrences are few.

Polydactyly

Polydactyly or duplication of a digit can occur either as a radial deformity (involving the thumb), central (index, middle, or ring), or as an
ulnar deformity (involving the small finger) (Table 722.4). Each has an
inherited and genetic component. Transmission is typically in an autosomal dominant pattern and has been linked to differences in genes
localized to chromosome 2.
Duplication of the thumb has been subdivided into seven types
by Flatt and Wassel based on the degree of duplication (Table 722.5).
Small finger duplication has been further subdivided into two types.

Fig. 722.7 Clinodactyly of the thumb.

Table 722.4  Syndromes Associated with Polydactyly*
Carpenter syndrome
Ellis-­van Creveld syndrome
Meckel-­Gruber syndrome
Polysyndactyly
Trisomy 13
Orofaciodigital syndrome
Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome
Bardet-­Biedl syndrome
Meckel-­Gruber syndrome
Pallister-­Hall syndrome
Short Rib-­polydactyly syndromes (type I, II)
*There are many syndromes with polydactyly; this is a partial list.

Table 722.5  Wassel Classification of Thumb Duplication
TYPE

CHARACTERISTICS

I

Bifid distal phalanx

II

Duplicate distal phalanx

III

Bifid proximal phalanx

IV

Duplicate proximal phalanx

V

Bifid metacarpal

VI

Duplicate metacarpal

VII

Triphalangeal component

Data from Wassel, HD. The results of surgery for polydactyly of the thumb: a review.
Clin Orthop. 1969;125:175–193.

Type A is a well-­formed digit. Type B is a small, often underdeveloped
supernumerary digit.

Treatment

Thumb and small finger duplication are typically treated with ablation of the supernumerary digit. Treatment options vary based on the
degree of involvement. Less well-­formed digits can be treated with
suture ligation. Well-­formed digits require reconstructive procedures
that preserve important structures such as the collateral ligaments and
nail folds (Fig. 722.8).

Thumb Hypoplasia

Hypoplasia of the thumb is a challenging condition for both the patient
and the doctor. The thumb represents ∼40% of hand function. A less-­
than-­optimal thumb can severely limit a patient’s function as they
grow and develop. Hypoplasia of the thumb can range from being mild
with slight shortening and underdeveloped musculature to complete

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 722 u The Upper Limb

A

B

C

D

E

4269

F

Fig. 722.8 A and B, Preoperative and postoperative pictures of a Wassel II thumb duplication. C, Clinical photograph. D, Radiograph postaxial
polydactyly. E, Clinical photograph. F, Radiograph of central polydactyly.

absence of the thumb. Radiographs are useful to help determine osseous abnormalities. The most important finding on physical exam is
the presence or absence of a stable carpometacarpal (CMC) joint. This
finding helps guide surgical treatment.

Treatment

If the thumb has a stable CMC joint, reconstruction is advised. Key
elements of thumb reconstruction include rebuilding the ulnar collateral ligament of the metacarpophalangeal joint, tendon transfers to aid
thumb abduction, and procedures to deepen the web space.
If a stable CMC joint is not present or the thumb is completely
absent (Fig. 722.9A), pollicization (surgical construction of a thumb
from a finger) is the definitive treatment (see Fig. 722.9B). Pollicization
is a complex procedure rotating the index finger along its neurovascular pedicle to form a thumb. This procedure is typically performed at
around 1 year of age and may be followed by subsequent procedures to
deepen the web space or augment abduction.

A

Syndactyly

Failure of the individual digits to separate during development produces syndactyly. Syndactyly is one of the more common anomalies observed in the upper limb (Table 722.6). It is seen in 0.5 of
1,000 live births. Syndactyly can be classified as simple (skin attachments only), complicated (bone and tendon attachments), complete (fusion to the tips, including the nail), or incomplete (simple
webbing).

Treatment

Division of conjoined digits should be considered before the second year of life. Border digits should be divided earlier (3-6 months)
because of concern for tethered growth of digits of unequal length.
Digits of similar size, such as the index, middle, and ring, may wait
until the child is older to consider separation. Reconstruction of the
web space and nail folds as well as appropriate skin-­grafting techniques
must be used to ensure the best possible functional and cosmetic result
(Fig. 722.10).

Fingertip Injuries

Young children commonly sustain crush injuries to the fingertips from
doorjambs, car doors, and other tight spaces. Injury can range from
a simple subungual hematoma to complete amputation of part or the
entire fingertip. Radiographs are important to rule out fractures. Physeal fractures associated with nailbed injuries are open fractures with
a high risk of osteomyelitis, growth arrest, and deformity if not treated
correctly.
The treatment of the soft tissue injury depends on the type of injury.
For suture repairs, only absorbable sutures should be used. Removal of
sutures from a young child’s fingertip can be difficult and may require
sedation or general anesthesia. If a subungual hematoma exists but the
nail is normal and no displaced fracture is present, the nail need not be
removed for nailbed repair. If the nail is torn or avulsed, the nail should
be removed, and the nailbed and skin should be inspected and repaired
with absorbable sutures where appropriate
If the fingertip is completely amputated, treatment depends on
the level of amputation and the age of the child. Distal amputations

B
Fig. 722.9 A, Congenital absence of the thumb. B, Postsurgical image after pollicization.

of skin and fat in children <2 years of age can be replaced as a composite graft with a reasonable chance of surviving. Similar amputations in older children can heal without replacing the skin if no
bone is exposed and the amputated area is small. A variety of coverage procedures exist for amputations through the midportion of
the nail. Amputations at or proximal to the proximal edge of the
fingernail should be referred emergently to a replant center for
consideration for microvascular replantation. When referring, all
amputated parts should be saved, wrapped in saline-­soaked gauze,
placed in a watertight bag, and then placed in ice water. Ice should
never directly contact the part because it can cause severe osmotic
and thermal injury.

Trigger Thumb and Fingers

The flexor tendons for the thumb and fingers pass through fibrous tunnels made up of a series of pulleys on the volar surface of the digits.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4270 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
These tunnels can become tight at the most proximal or first annular
pulley. Swelling of the underlying tendon occurs, and the tendon no
longer glides under the pulley. In children, the most common digit
involved is the thumb. Trigger thumbs are not congenital deformities
but rather are developmental and most frequently occur before 2 years

of age. The incidence of trigger thumb is approximately 3 per 1,000
children at 1 year of age. A history of trauma is rare, and the condition is often painless. Overall function is rarely impaired. A trigger
thumb typically manifests with the inability to fully extend the thumb
interphalangeal joint. A palpable nodule can be felt in the flexor pollicis longus tendon at the base of the thumb metacarpal phalangeal
joint volarly. Other conditions can mimic trigger thumb, including the
thumb-­in-­palm deformity of cerebral palsy. Similar findings in the fingers (index through small) are much less common and may be associated with inflammatory conditions such as juvenile idiopathic arthritis
(Fig. 722.11).

Table 722.6  Syndromes Associated with Syndactyly*
Apert syndrome
Carpenter syndrome
Chotzen syndrome
de Lange syndrome
Fanconi pancytopenia
Fetal hydantoin syndrome
Holt-­Oram syndrome
Laurence-­Moon-­Biedl syndrome
Noack syndrome
Orofaciodigital syndrome
Pfeiffer syndrome
Poland syndrome
Polysyndactyly
Trisomy 13
Trisomy 18
Trisomy 21

Treatment

Trigger thumbs spontaneously resolve in up to 30% of children who
are diagnosed before 1 year of age. Spontaneous resolution beyond that
age is uncommon. Corticosteroid injections are effective in adults but
are not effective in children and risk injury to the nearby digital nerves.
Surgical release of the first annular pulley is curative and is generally
performed between 1 and 3 years of age. Treatment of trigger fingers
other than the thumb in children involves evaluation and treatment
of any underlying inflammatory process and in some cases surgical
decompression of the flexor sheath and possible flexor tendon partial
excision.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

*There are many more syndromes associated with syndactyly; this list is not all-­inclusive.

A

C

B

D

Fig. 722.10 Preoperative (A and B) and postoperative (C and D) pictures of a simple syndactyly.

A

B

C

Fig. 722.11 A, Clinical picture of trigger thumb in a 2 yr old; note flexed posture of the interphalangeal joint. B, Intraoperative picture of flexor
tendon following release of A1 pulley. C, Intraoperative picture of benign growth along flexor tendon causing triggering in an index finger.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 723 u Arthrogryposis 4271
with arthrogryposis; however, the type of anterior horn cell involvement is usually not from spinal muscular atrophy syndrome. Other less
common neurologic disorders include neonatal myasthenia, myotonic
dystrophy, olivo-­ponto-­cerebellar disorders, and neuronal migration
anomalies.

Chapter 723

Arthrogryposis
Christine M. Goodbody, Helen M. Horstmann,
and Richard S. Davidson
Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita refers to a heterogeneous group
of muscular, neurologic, and connective tissue anomalies that present
with two or more joint nonprogressive contractures at birth, as well as
muscle weakness. It is associated with abnormal contraction of muscle
fibers, causing reduced mobility with a decreased active and passive arc
of motion. Arthrogryposis is not a specific diagnosis but a descriptive
term with various etiologies and complex clinical features, including
multiple congenital contractures of various limb joints. It is associated
with over 300 different disorders encompassing malformation, malfunction, and neurologic deficiency (see Chapter 648.10).
Approximately 1% of all births show some form of contractures of
the joints ranging from unilateral clubfoot to amyoplasia (the most
severe), a condition characterized by pervasive, crippling contractures involving many joints. The overall incidence of arthrogryposis is
1/5,000-10,000 live births with equal gender ratios.
Although children with arthrogryposis may have many other
problems, such as micrognathia and feeding issues, focus is on the
orthopedic problems frequently seen in this group of children. In the
absence of central nervous system lesions, many children have normal
intelligence.

ETIOLOGY

The main cause of arthrogryposis is fetal akinesia or decreased fetal
movement. The associated pattern of abnormalities is often referred to
as the fetal akinesia deformation sequence. This sequence manifests
as multiple joint contractures, oligohydramnios, craniofacial anomalies (e.g., micrognathia), and pulmonary hypoplasia because of lack
of movement of the diaphragm and intercostal muscles. Intrinsic and
extrinsic causes of fetal akinesia are categorized into six groups (Fig.
723.1) and include a multitude of disorders (Table 723.1).

Neurologic Abnormalities

Neurologic abnormalities are present in 70–80% of cases. Patchy damage to the anterior horn cells of the spinal cord can lead to characteristic limb posturing of arthrogryposis. Neurologic disorders, such
as spinal muscular atrophy and anterior horn disease, are associated

Anterior horn cell disease
Other neurologic disorders
Maternal
diseases
Vascular
compromise

Myopathies and other
muscle disorders

Fetal
hypokinesia or
restricted fetal
movement

Fetal
crowding
Connective tissue
abnormalities

Multiple
congenital
contractures

Fig. 723.1 Etiology of arthrogryposis. (Data from Hall JG. Arthrogryposis multiplex congenital: etiology, genetics, classification, diagnostic approach, and general aspects. J Pediatr Orthop B. 1996;6:159–
166.)

Muscular Abnormalities

These rare abnormalities affect the function and structure of the muscles. Amyoplasia, the most common form of arthrogryposis, is associated with abnormally decreased fetal movement and is characterized
by underdeveloped, contracted muscles causing joint deformity. The
involved skeletal muscle is replaced by fatty or fibrous tissue. Some
muscular diseases associated with arthrogryposis are muscular dystrophies, congenital myopathies (central core, nemaline, centronuclear),
intrauterine myositis, and mitochondrial diseases.

Limited Intrauterine Spacing

Uterine constraint is rarely the primary cause of arthrogryposis. Maternal uterine anomalies will occasionally increase contractures of fetal
limbs with arthrogryposis already existing. Other known causes are
lack of amniotic fluid within the uterus, and tumors, such as fibroids,
that can prevent movement by impinging on uterine space.

Connective Tissue Abnormalities

When the tendons, bones, joints, and joint lining develop atypically,
the resulting decrease in fetal movement causes congenital contractures. Diseases such as diastrophic dysplasia, campomelic dysplasia,
and metatropic dysplasia result from connective tissue not developing
properly. These are specific diagnoses resulting in limited joint motion
and not true distal arthrogryposis. In some cases, the connective tissue
develops normally but does not attach to the proper location around a
bone or joint, and the subsequent abnormal movement results in distal
joint involvement.

Maternal Diseases

Maternal diseases, such as multiple sclerosis, diabetes mellitus, myasthenia gravis, maternal hyperthermia, infection (Zika virus), drugs,
and trauma, are associated with an increased incidence of arthrogryposis. In approximately 10% of neonates born to mothers with myasthenia gravis, maternal antibodies enter the fetal circulation through
the placenta, causing transient myasthenia gravis; this inhibits fetal
acetylcholine receptors, which leads to damaged fetal muscles.

Intrauterine Vascular Compromise

Abnormal fetal blood supply may be associated with arthrogryposis.
This occurs when inadequate vascular supply to the fetus causes fetal
hypoxia resulting in anterior horn cell death, which, in turn, decreases
neurologic and myologic function. The result is fetal akinesia and secondary joint contractures. Multiple congenital contractures have been
reported in individuals after bleeding throughout pregnancy or after a
failed attempt at terminating the pregnancy.

CLASSIFICATION

Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita is divided into subgroups with different signs, symptoms, and causes as a practical way to make a differential diagnosis. However, given the wide spectrum of disease presentation
and etiology, no one classification system exists that is entirely comprehensive. Disorders involving primarily the limbs, such as amyoplasia
and distal arthrogryposis, are the most common subgroups. Disorders
involving limbs and other body parts typically represent a form of multiple pterygium syndrome, which is characterized by weblike membranes
that form across joints, affecting a child’s ability to extend those joints
and causing fixed flexion deformities. Disorders with limb involvement
and abnormal neurologic function are caused by atypical central nervous
system development, peripheral nervous system abnormalities, damaged
or absent anterior horn cells, or a combination thereof.
Amyoplasia, also known as classic arthrogryposis, is a sporadic symmetric disorder that causes fibrotic replacement of the muscles. Symptoms include internally rotated and adducted shoulders, extended

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4272 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 723.1  Associated Etiologies of Arthrogryposis
ARTHROGRYPOSIS CAUSED BY NERVOUS SYSTEM DISORDERS
• Focal anterior horn cell deficiency
• Generalized anterior horn cell deficiency
• Structural brain disorder/damage
• Uncertain location
(Spastic conditions are excluded)
DISTAL ARTHROGRYPOSIS SYNDROMES
• Type I dominant distal
• Type IIa dominant distal (Freeman-­Sheldon syndrome)
• Digitotalar dysmorphism
• Trismus pseudocamptodactyly
• Distal distribution, type not specified
PTERYGIUM SYNDROMES
• Multiple pterygium syndrome
• Lethal multiple pterygium syndrome
• Popliteal pterygium syndrome
• Ptosis, scoliosis, pterygia
• Antecubital webbing syndrome (Liebenberg)
MYOPATHIES
• Emery-­Dreifuss muscular dystrophy
• Hypotonia, myopathy, mild contractures
ABNORMALITIES OF JOINTS AND CONTIGUOUS TISSUE
• Congenital contractural arachnodactyly
• Freeman-­Sheldon syndrome
• Laxity or hypertonicity with intrauterine dislocation and
contractures
• Larsen syndrome
• Spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia with joint laxity
• Trisomy 18, extended breech position with bilateral hip
dislocation
• Siblings with bifid humeri, hypertelorism, and hip and knee joint
dislocations
SKELETAL DISORDERS
• Diastrophic dysplasia
• Parastremmatic dysplasia
• Kniest dysplasia
• Metatropic dysplasia
• Campomelic dysplasia
• Schwartz syndrome
• Fetal alcohol syndrome with synostoses
• Osteogenesis imperfecta with bowing/contractures
INTRAUTERINE/MATERNAL FACTORS
• Fetal alcohol syndrome with contractures
• Infections
• Untreated maternal systemic lupus erythematosus
• Intrauterine fetal constraint
• Deformity (pressure)
• Amniotic fluid leakage
• Multiple pregnancies
• Intrauterine tumors
• Disruption (bands)
MISCELLANEOUS
• Pseudotrisomy 18 with contractures
• Roberts pseudothalidomide syndrome
• Deafness with distal contractures
• VACTERL association
• Multiple abnormalities and contractures not otherwise specified
• ARC
SINGLE JOINT
• Campomelia
• Symphalangism
• “Trigger” finger
ARC, Arthrogryposis, renal tubular acidosis, cholestasis; VACTERL, vertebral defects,
imperforate anus, congenital heart disease, tracheoesophageal fistula, renal and limb
defects.
Modified from Mennen U, Van Heest A, Ezaki MB, et al. Arthrogryposis multiplex
congenita. J Hand Surg Br. 2005;30(5):468–474. Copyright 2005 The British Society for
Surgery of the Hand.

elbows, pronated forearms, flexed fingers and wrists, dislocated
hips, feet with severe equinovarus contractures, and extended knees.
Involved muscles are hypoplastic and fibrotic. Often, patients have
midfacial hemangioma. Intelligence is usually normal (Figs. 723.2 and
723.3).
Distal arthrogryposis is an autosomal dominant disorder that primarily affects the distal joints of the limbs. Characteristics of the upper
limbs are medially overlapping fingers, clenched fists, ulnar deviation
of fingers, camptodactyly, and hypoplasia. Lower limbs show talipes
equinovarus, calcaneovalgus, vertical talus, or metatarsus varus (Fig.
723.4), in addition to limited motion at the involved joints. Ten different types of distal arthrogryposis have been categorized based on
specific traits they share with each other (Table 723.2).

MANAGEMENT OF ORTHOPEDIC PROBLEMS OF
ARTHROGRYPOSIS

When a child is born with arthrogryposis, the many stiff or dislocated
joints pose issues of timing and best practices of management. The
overarching goal of management in the lower extremities are plantigrade feet and joints that function to optimize ambulatory potential,
whereas in the upper extremity, the aim is largely the ability to grasp,
feed, and toilet independently. A child may have stiff elbows, dislocated
hips; dislocated, hyperextended, or contracted knees; and clubfeet (Fig.
723.5). The stiffness and deformity need to be aggressively addressed
through a combination of modalities. A team of clinicians, including
therapists for the upper and lower extremities, orthotists, and orthopedic surgeons, will be involved.
Initially, passive range-­of-­motion exercises and judicious splinting
directed and assisted by physical and occupational therapy will help
to address the various deformities. Splinting and casting can be augmented by a taping program that can be taught to the family so that the
taping can be redone frequently to take advantage of improved range of
motion. The ingenuity of the therapists and/or orthotists to create the
right splints and braces using appropriate thermoplastics, neoprene,
Velcro, and other materials can be effective (Fig. 723.6).
The therapeutic and orthopedic goal for the child with arthrogrypotic limb deformities is to achieve maximal joint motion and to
optimize joint position for function. In the lower extremities, the foot
needs to be plantigrade. The knees need to have optimal motion for
sitting and standing. Hips need to be stabilized, especially if the child
has walking potential. In the upper extremities, in cases where there is
extreme stiffness, the goals should include positioning of one arm for
feeding and the other for toileting. Two-­handed activities require some
symmetry, which can be a challenging goal with extreme contractures
and limited muscle strength. Serial casting may be beneficial in correcting joint contractures. Although scoliosis is common, it usually
does not become a problem until adolescence (see Chapter 720).

FOOT PROBLEMS

Clubfoot deformities are the most commonly seen deformities with
arthrogryposis (Fig. 723.7). A clubfoot has components of hindfoot
equinus, midfoot varus, and forefoot adduction. Clubfeet in arthrogryposis tend to be more resistant to improvement than in idiopathic cases,
but the traditional methods of treatment are nevertheless employed.
Casting is begun shortly after birth in a method known as the Ponseti
method. Casts are changed weekly until a plateau is reached, then heel
cord lengthening is needed. Other deformities such as vertical talus
are also seen and are addressed in a similar approach, although with
case-­appropriate differences in casting techniques (see Chapter 715).
Persistent stiffness often leads to more comprehensive soft tissue
releases. This is typically done around age 6-12 months and is followed
by 3 months of further casting and additional bracing as needed, especially as the foot is growing. When deformities are not corrected in
early childhood, additional bony surgery may be needed later. Some of
the approaches to this involve bony wedge osteotomies, lateral column
lengthening, bone decancellation, or talectomy. Ring or multiaxial
monolateral external fixation with or without osteotomies are used in
late correction of residual deformities.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 723 u Arthrogryposis 4273

Fig. 723.2 Infant with stiff elbows, wrists, fingers, dislocated left hip,
valgus stiff knees, and clubfeet.

Fig. 723.4 Infant with club feet, stiff knees, dislocated hips, stiff fingers, and facial hemangioma.

KNEE PROBLEMS

Fig. 723.3 Infant with stiff elbows, wrists, fingers, dislocated left hip,
clubfeet, and micrognathia.

Children with significant deformities are often in ankle foot
orthoses through much of their lives to avoid deformity recurrence
and to augment the standing base caused by weak leg muscles. A
plantigrade, pain-­free, stable foot is the goal of foot management.
Foot stiffness is anticipated and unavoidable in arthrogryposis
involving the foot.

Knee issues in patients with arthrogryposis may include knee
extension or flexion contracture, subluxation, and stiffness. Knee
flexion contracture is more common in arthrogryposis and is often
resistant to nonsurgical treatment. It can be structurally complex
and associated with skin webbing known as pterygiums, which
require Z-­plasty lengthenings. In the case of a flexion contracture,
the quadriceps musculature is often deficient and weak. When a
trial of casting and splinting of the knee contractures is insufficient,
surgical intervention with hamstring lengthenings and posterior
knee capsular releases are often needed. Soft tissue relaxation by
femoral shortening has also shown benefit.
In the case of knee hyperextension, the quadriceps are sometimes
fibrotic and weak despite seeming to overpower the hamstrings.
Casting and splinting should begin shortly after birth, which can
be done in conjunction with clubfoot casting as needed following
the principles of Ponseti. If splinting and therapy fail, lengthening
of the quadriceps can be achieved through a number of surgical
techniques that may include detachment of the rectus femoris and
lengthening of the quadriceps either percutaneously or through a
mini open procedure, which may minimize scarring.
Long-­standing stiffness may lead to joint surface flattening and
other bony abnormalities that can permanently reduce the arc of
motion. Repositioning the arc of motion through bony osteotomies
may improve sitting or standing. Follow-­up bracing can help to compensate for weak, fibrotic muscles of the legs. Use of guided growth
plates and screws may also be of benefit.

HIP PROBLEMS

Teratologic hip dislocations are common within the spectrum of
arthrogryposis and usually require open reduction of the hip. Hips
in a child with less upper-­extremity involvement and more supple
hips that are not pathologically stiff may respond to early treatment with a Pavlik harness. Coexisting knee hyperextension should

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4274 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 723.2  A Classification System and Clinical Features
of Distal Arthrogryposes
TYPE

DESCRIPTION

I

Characteristic clinical features are camptodactyly
and talipes equinovarus with possible concomitant
shoulder and hip contractures. The DA1 variant is
determined by a gene located on chromosome 9.

II

The phenotype was first described in 1938 as the
Freeman-­Sheldon syndrome, where contractures
of fingers and toes are accompanied by kyphosis,
scoliosis, and malformations of the facial skeleton
with characteristic facial appearance: narrow mouth,
wide cheeks, an H-­shaped chin dimple, small wide-­
based nose, high palate, and small tongue. Growth
retardation, inguinal hernia, and cryptorchidism
have also been reported. Another name of this
syndrome is “whistling face” syndrome. The
Freeman-­Sheldon syndrome is currently classified
as DA2A, as a separate DA2B subtype, known
as Sheldon-­Hall syndrome has been described;
this syndrome combines clinical features of DA1
(hand and foot contractures) and some features of
DA2 (prominent nasolabial folds, slanted down-­
facing eyes, and narrow mouth) and is currently
considered to be probably the most common type
of distal arthrogryposis.

III

Also known as Gordon syndrome, this rare syndrome
is characterized by low stature and palatoschisis.

IV

Rare. Contractures with severe scoliosis.

V

Contractures with ocular signs and symptoms
such as limited eye motion, ptosis, strabismus,
and the absence of typical hand flexion creases.
Chest wall muscle abnormalities have also been
observed, potentially causing restricted respiratory
movements and, consequently, pulmonary
hypertension.

VI

Similar to DA3, DA4; very rare, characterized by
sensorineural auditory abnormalities.

VII

Difficulties in mouth opening (trismus) and
pseudocamptodactyly: wrists position in palmar
flexion with MCP joints in extension. Sometimes
accompanied by low stature and knee flexion
contractures.

VIII

Autosomal dominant multiple pterygium syndrome.

IX

Beals syndrome, i.e., congenital arachnodactyly with
contractures of small joints of the fingers. Patients
with this type of arthrogryposis are tall and slender,
phenotypically resembling Marfan syndrome but
without cardiovascular abnormalities.

X

Congenital plantar flexion contractures of the foot.

Fig. 723.5 Child with stiff elbows, wrists, knees, and clubfeet.

From Kowalczyk B, Feluś J. Arthrogryposis: an update on clinical aspects, etiology, and
treatment strategies. Arch Med Sci. 2016;12(1):10–24. Table 1.

first be treated with physical therapy and serial casting to allow for
appropriate Pavlik harness fitting. However, careful observation of
the hip during knee flexion is necessary because tightening of the
quadriceps and hip flexors can push the hip into posterior dislocation. Once some knee flexion has been achieved, the Pavlik harness
can be useful in further flexing the knee and maintaining hip stability in the infant. Most often, the hips are stiff and not reducible by
closed means. For these, open reduction with pelvic reconstruction

Fig. 723.6 Infant with splints to extend metatarsophalangeal joints,
wrists, and knees.

and femoral osteotomy are commonly required, typically at 1 year
of age. There is some controversy about reducing bilateral hip dislocations because a high failure rate can result in asymmetry of the
pelvis, pain, leg length inequality, and stiffness. If a child has little

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 723 u Arthrogryposis 4275
Shoulder

Because of the rotational capacity of the shoulder, derotation osteotomy of the humerus is only occasionally needed. This is usually done
in later childhood.

Elbow

A stiff elbow that does not respond to therapy requires surgical
intervention starting with soft tissue and capsular release. Capsulotomy of the posterior elbow combined with a V-­Y or Z reconstructive lengthening of the triceps allows improved elbow flexion.
Muscle transfer to the forearm can permit active elbow flexion;
however, each child needs individual assessment as to an available
flexor source. The triceps is commonly used, but caution must be
exerted into the overall muscle balance because use of the triceps
can create elbow flexion overpowering and an opposite contracture.

Wrist

ambulatory potential, they may do as well retaining the bilateral hip
dislocations and positioning the hips for sitting. Management decisions should be made in conjunction with the family and guided by
a pediatric hip surgeon.

Wrist flexion deformity is improved with soft tissue balancing as well
as partial carpectomies. The carpectomies need to be trapezoidal with
more removed from the dorsum and the radial side to balance the wrist
flexion contracture as well as the tendency for ulnar deviation. Thumb
adduction may require an adductor release with an opponensplasty.
Tendon transfers such as transfer of the extensor indicis pollicis to the
extensor pollicis longus is helpful for improved function of the thumb
in clasp thumb deformity.
Finger stiffness and wrist contractures often respond to therapy and
bracing without need for surgery.

Ambulation

Scoliosis

Fig. 723.7 Clubfeet in infant with arthrogryposis.

As would be expected, walking is more difficult for children with
arthrogryposis because of the muscle weakness and limited joint
motion. Children with arthrogryposis who walk have lower activity
levels and take fewer steps than their peers. Not surprisingly, muscle
fatigue and pain on exertion are common.

UPPER EXTREMITY PROBLEMS

If splinting and a movement exercise program do not result in
optimally functional upper extremities, surgical management may
improve use of the arms of the child with arthrogryposis. A typical
child with arthrogrypotic involvement of the upper extremities has
internally rotated arms, extended elbows, flexed wrists, and thumb-­
in-­palm or clasp-­thumb deformities (see Figs. 723.2 and 723.3).
Treatment is geared toward optimizing use of the arms and hands,
particularly for critical activities of daily living, such as feeding and
toileting. Therapy to improve motion of the joints is started immediately after birth. Pediatric hand therapists are the optimal leaders
of the mobility treatment program. Therapy is augmented by use
of splints so that less-­extensive surgery will ultimately be required.
The elbow is the critical length adjuster of the arm, allowing the
arm to reach out as is necessary for toileting or to approach the
mouth for feeding. If necessary, lack of these motions can be compensated for with modified silverware and other adaptive equipment, including arm extenders for grabbing.

Surgery of the Upper Extremity

Surgical correction of arthrogrypotic upper extremity contractures
should be started after 1-3 months and completed by age 12 months so
that the child can optimize his or her motor development. This allows
for improved results by optimizing the joint growth remodeling plasticity. One-­stage procedures yield the best results. Delays in surgery
result in more problems of intraarticular adhesions as well as fixed joint
incongruity.

Scoliosis develops in some children with arthrogryposis, with the
reported incidence ranging from 2.5–66%. Scoliosis can be congenital or paralytic. It is often accompanied by hip contractures associated
with hip dislocation and compensatory lumbar lordosis. Curves <30
degrees can be treated initially with bracing in a thoracolumbar spinal orthosis (TLSO brace). After 40 degrees, spinal fusion is generally
warranted.

Surgical Staging

Surgical treatment of the lower limbs usually begins distally and
works proximally. The feet are corrected around 6 months of age,
the knees around 8 months of age, and the hips around 12 months
of age because pelvic osteotomy is often needed to stabilize the hips
properly.
The upper extremities are corrected during infancy when the child
is seen early. Hand, physical, and occupational therapy are a critical
part of the team to optimize function before and after surgery. Further
surgery during childhood may be needed to optimize functional use of
the upper and lower extremities.

Prognosis

Although most patients with arthrogryposis are ambulatory into
adulthood, fewer are entirely independent, and many have pain
or limitations in walking and standing. Surgical advancements in
upper extremity positioning have improved function, and procedures to correct lower extremity contractures, including not only
surgery but also casting for clubfeet, have increased long-­term
ambulatory potential. However, there is significant variability in
this population, and further work must be done to optimize intervention techniques and their appropriate utilization.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4276 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
loose attachment to the shaft. This intact hinge or sleeve of periosteum
lessens the extent of fracture displacement and assists in reduction and
maintenance of fracture reduction. The thick periosteum, however,
may act as an impediment to reduction, particularly if the fracture has
penetrated the periosteum, or in reduction of a displaced growth plate
fracture.

Chapter 724

Common Fractures
Jason B. Anari, Alexandre Arkader, and
Lawrence Wells

724.1 Unique Characteristics of Pediatric
Fractures

Trauma is a leading cause of death and disability in children older than
1 year of age (see Chapter 14). Several factors make fractures of the
immature skeleton different from those involving the mature skeleton.
The anatomy, biomechanics, and physiology of the pediatric skeletal
system differ from those of adults, resulting in different fracture patterns (Fig. 724.1), diagnostic challenges, and management techniques.
Children have a high functional demand and expectations while carrying concerns regarding remaining skeletal growth and development.
Epiphyseal lines, rarefaction, dense growth lines, congenital fractures, and pseudofractures may appear on radiographs, which make
it challenging to identify and differentiate an acute fracture. Although
most fractures in children heal well, some fractures have poor outcomes
if handled with insufficient expertise. The differences in the pediatric
skeletal system predispose children to injuries different from those of
adults. Important differences are the presence of periosseous cartilage,
physes, and a thicker, stronger, more osteogenic periosteum that produces new bone, called callus, more rapidly and in greater amounts.
The pediatric bone is less dense and more porous than adult bone. The
low density is from lower mineral content, and the increased porosity
is the result of an increased number of haversian canals and vascular
channels. These differences result in a comparatively lower modulus
of elasticity and lower bending strength. The bone in children can fail
either in tension or in compression; because the fracture lines do not
propagate as in adults, there is less chance of comminuted fractures.
Hence, pediatric bone can crush, splinter, and break incompletely (e.g.,
buckle fracture, greenstick fracture), as opposed to adult bone which
generally breaks like glass and may comminute.
A common teaching is that joint injuries, dislocation, and ligament
disruptions are infrequent in children. Damage to the physis is more
likely. Although this is generally true, MRI studies show that ligament
damage in ankle injuries may be more common than once thought.
Interdigitating mammillary bodies and the perichondrial ring enhance
the strength of the physes. Biomechanically, the physes are not as
strong as the ligaments or metaphyseal bone. The physis is most resistant to traction and least resistant to torsional forces. The periosteum is
loosely attached to the shaft of bone and adheres densely to the physeal
periphery. The periosteum is essentially injured in all fractures, but it
is less likely to have complete circumferential rupture because of its

A

B

C

D

E

Jason B. Anari, Alexandre Arkader, and
Lawrence Wells

FRACTURE REMODELING

Remodeling is the third and final phase in the biology of fracture
healing; it is preceded by the inflammatory and reparative phases.
This occurs from a combination of appositional bone deposition on
the concavity of deformity, resorption on the convexity, and asymmetric physeal growth. Thus reduction accuracy is somewhat less
important than it is in adults (exceptions include intraarticular fractures) (Fig. 724.2). The three major factors that have a bearing on
the potential for angular correction are skeletal age, distance from
the physis, and orientation to the joint axis. Rotational deformity and
angular deformity not in the axis of the joint motion have less potential for remodeling. Remodeling is greatest when the child has many
years of growth remaining and when the fracture occurs close to the
physis, has less deformity to remodel, and is adjacent to a rapidly
growing physis (e.g., the proximal humerus or distal radius). Remodeling typically occurs over several months after the fracture until
skeletal maturity. Generally, skeletal maturity is reached in postmenarchal females between 13 and 15 years of age and in males between
15 and 17 years of age.

OVERGROWTH

Physeal stimulation from the hyperemia associated with fracture healing may also cause overgrowth. It is usually more prominent in lower
extremity long bones such as the femur. The growth acceleration is usually present for 6 months to 1 year after the injury. Femoral fractures
in children younger than 10 years of age may overgrow up to 1-3 cm.
If external fixation or casting is employed, bayonet apposition of bone
may be preferred for younger children to compensate for the expected
overgrowth. This overgrowth phenomenon will result in equal or near
equal limb lengths at the conclusion of fracture remodeling if the fracture shortens less than 2 cm. After 10 years of age, overgrowth does not
tend to occur, and anatomic alignment is recommended. In physeal
injuries, growth stimulation is associated with use of implants or fixation hardware that can cause stimulus for longitudinal growth.

F

G

H

I

Fig. 724.1 Illustration of fracture patterns. A, Longitudinal fracture line parallel to bony axis. B, Transverse fracture line perpendicular to bony axis.

C, Oblique fracture line at angle to bony axis. D, Spiral fracture line runs a curvilinear course to the bony axis. E, Impacted fractured bone ends
compressed together. F, Comminuted fragmentation of bone into three or more parts. G, Greenstick bending of bone with incomplete fracture
of convex side. H, Bowing bone plastic deformation. I, Torus buckling fracture. (From White N, Sty R. Radiological evaluation and classification of
pediatric fractures. Clin Pediatr Emerg Med. 2002;3:94–105.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 724 u Common Fractures

B

A
A

B

Fig. 724.2 Remodeling in children is often extensive, as in this proxi-

mal tibial fracture (A) and as seen 1 yr later (B). (From Dormans JP.
Pediatric Orthopedics: Introduction to Trauma. Philadelphia: Mosby;
2005:38.)

Fig. 724.3 A, Harris growth arrest lines on either side of the femur
pointing centrally in the femur indicating a central growth arrest. B, Corresponding MRI image showing central growth arrest. (A, Courtesy Dr.
Keith D. Baldwin, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia.)

PROGRESSIVE DEFORMITY

RAPID HEALING

Children’s fractures heal more quickly than adults as a result of children’s growth potential and thicker, more active periosteum. When
children approach adolescence and maturity, the rate of healing slows
and mirrors that of an adult.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

724.2 Pediatric Fracture Patterns
Jason B. Anari, Alexandre Arkader, and
Lawrence Wells
The different pediatric fracture patterns are the reflection of a child’s
characteristic skeletal system. The majority of pediatric fractures can
be managed by closed methods and heal well.

PLASTIC DEFORMATION

Plastic deformation is unique to children. It is most commonly
seen in the forearm and occasionally the fibula. The fracture results
from a force that produces microscopic failure on the tensile side of
bone and does not propagate to the concave side (Fig. 724.4). The
concave side of bone also shows evidence of microscopic failure in
compression. The bone is angulated beyond its elastic limit, but the
energy is insufficient to produce a fracture. Thus no fracture line
is visible radiographically (Fig. 724.5). Although the plastic deformation is permanent, it is important to remember that children
have great remodeling capability; for example, a 20-­degree bend
in the ulna of a 4-­year-­old child is expected to correct completely
with growth. These findings inform “acceptability” of fracture
alignment.

Zone of
overload
Zone of
fatigue

Force

Injuries to the physes can be complicated by permanent or temporary
growth arrest, leading to progressive limb deformity. The most common cause is complete or partial closure of the growth plate. This can
occur in any long bone but is particularly seen in fractures involving
the distal ulna, distal femur, and proximal tibia growth plates. An MRI
is helpful for early diagnosis of growth arrest, as well as measurement
of the percent of physeal closure after such an injury. Harris growth
arrest lines may be observed in the setting of asymmetric growth and
will point toward the area of growth arrest (Fig. 724.3). If these lines
are parallel to the physis, this finding indicates that the growth plate is
healthy. As a consequence of growth arrest, angular deformity or shortening, or both, can occur. The partial arrest may be peripheral, central, or combined. The magnitude of deformity depends on the specific
physis involved, the degree of involvement, and the amount of growth
remaining.

4277

B

C

A

Zone of
load

D
Fracture
point

Zone
of elastic
deformation

Zone of plastic deformation
Deformation

Fig. 724.4 Graphic relation of bony deformation (bowing) and force

(longitudinal compression) showing that the limit of an elastic response
is not a fracture but plastic deformation. If the force continues, a fracture results. A, Reversible bowing with stress; B, microfractures occur;
C, point of maximal strength; between C and D, bowing fractures; and
D, linear fracture occurs. (Modified from Borden S IV. Roentgen recognition of acute plastic bowing of the forearm in children. Am J Roentgenol Radium Ther Nucl Med. 1975;125:524–530.)

BUCKLE OR TORUS FRACTURE

Buckle, or torus, fractures represent a failure in compression of the
bone, usually occurring at the junction of the metaphysis and diaphysis. The distal radius is the most common location, but it may occur
in other areas as well (Fig. 724.6). They are inherently stable, usually
associated with an acceptable amount of angulation, and heal in 3-4
weeks with simple immobilization.

GREENSTICK FRACTURE

These fractures occur when the bone is bent and there is failure on the
tensile (convex) side of the bone. The fracture line does not propagate
to the concave side of the bone (Fig. 724.7). The concave side shows
evidence of microscopic failure with plastic deformation. If the angulation at the fracture site is unacceptable, it is usually necessary to break
the bone on the concave side because the plastic deformation recoils it
back to the deformed position. It is important to distinguish this unicortical fracture pattern from buckle fractures, as these fractures are
at greater risk of loss of reduction and often require a longer period of
immobilization.

COMPLETE FRACTURES

Fractures that propagate completely through the bone are called complete fractures. These fractures may be classified as spiral, transverse, or
oblique, depending on the direction and shape of the fracture lines. A
rotational force is responsible for spiral fractures. Most spiral fractures

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4278 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

Fig. 724.7 Greenstick fractures of the radial and ulnar diaphyses in an
8-­yr-­old boy. The fracture lines only extend through part of the cortex.
(From Pai DR, Strouse PJ. Skeletal trauma. In: Coley BD ed. Caffey’s
Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig.
142.5, p. 1435.)

Table 724.1  Salter-­Harris Classification
16°

SALTER-­
HARRIS TYPE

Fig. 724.5 Plastic deformation is a microfailure in tension without a
visible fracture line. (Courtesy Dr. John Flynn, Children’s Hospital, Philadelphia.)

CHARACTERISTICS

I

Separation through the physis, usually through
the zones of hypertrophic and degenerating
cartilage cell columns

II

Fracture through a portion of the physis but
extending through the metaphyses

III

Fracture through a portion of the physis extending
through the epiphysis and into the joint

IV

Fracture across the metaphysis, physis, and
epiphysis

V

Crush injury to the physis

bending force and is amenable to successful reduction by using the
intact periosteum from the concave side as a hinge.

EPIPHYSEAL FRACTURES

A

B

Fig. 724.6 Buckle fracture is a partial failure in compression. Anteroposterior (A) and lateral (B) radiographs of the distal radius. (From
Dormans JP. Pediatric Orthopedics: Introduction to Trauma. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2005:37.)

are stable and heal quickly due to the large surface area; however, spiral
fractures occurring as a result of a high-­energy trauma may present
with shortening of the bone and loss of alignment. Oblique fractures
are defined by a 30-­degree angle to the axis of the bone and are often
unstable. The transverse fracture pattern occurs following a three-­point

Fractures involving the epiphysis often involve the growth plate (physis); therefore the potential for growth disturbance leading to deformity or discrepancy exists, and long-­term observation is necessary. The
distal radial physis is the most injured physis. Salter and Harris (SH)
classified physeal injuries into five groups (Table 724.1 and Fig. 724.8).
This classification helps to predict the outcome of the injury and offers
guidelines in formulating treatment. Most SH type I and II fractures
usually can be managed by closed reduction techniques and do not
require perfect alignment because they tend to remodel with growth,
as long as there is enough growth remaining. One classic exception is
the distal femur, where SH type II fractures are unstable and require
anatomic reduction with adequate fixation. The SH type III and IV
epiphyseal fractures involve the articular surface and require anatomic
alignment (<2 mm displacement) to prevent any step off and realign
the growth cells of the physis. SH type V fractures are usually not diagnosed initially. They manifest in the future with growth disturbance.
Other injuries to the epiphysis are avulsion injuries of the tibial spine
and muscle attachments to the pelvis. Osteochondral fractures are also
defined as physeal injuries that do not involve the growth plate.

CHILD ABUSE

See also Chapter 17.
Fractures are the second most common manifestation of child
abuse after skin injury (bruises, burns/abrasions). The orthopedic surgeon sees 30–50% of all nonaccidental traumas. Child abuse should
be suspected in nonambulatory children with lower-­extremity long-­
bone fractures. No fracture pattern or types are pathognomonic for

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 724 u Common Fractures

4279

Table 724.2  Skeletal Injuries from Child Abuse

Type I

Type III

HIGH-­SPECIFICITY FINDINGS
• Classic metaphyseal lesions
• Posterior rib fracture
• Scapular fracture
• Sternal fracture
• Spinous process fracture
• First rib fracture

Type II

Type IV

MODERATE-­SPECIFICITY FINDINGS
• Multiple fractures
• Fractures of differing age
• Spine fracture
• Complex skull fracture
• Physeal fractures of the long bones
• Digital fractures

Type V

Fig. 724.8 Salter-­Harris classification of physeal fractures, types I-­V.
child abuse; any type of fracture can result from nonaccidental trauma
(Table 724.2). Transverse fractures in long bones are the most prevalent, and corner fractures in the metaphysis are the most classic. The
fractures that suggest nonaccidental injury include femur fractures in
nonambulatory children (younger than age 18 months), distal femoral
metaphyseal corner fractures, posterior rib fractures, scapular spinous
process fractures, and proximal humeral fractures. Fractures that were
unwitnessed or carry a suspicious or changing story or delayed presentation also warrant investigation. A full skeletal survey is essential in every suspected case of child abuse because it can demonstrate
other fractures in different stages of healing. Radiographically, some
systemic diseases mimic signs of child abuse, such as osteogenesis
imperfecta, osteomyelitis, Caffey disease, vitamin C deficiency, and
fatigue fractures. Many hospitals have a multidisciplinary team to
evaluate and treat patients who are victims of child abuse; these teams
are critical to engage early and preferably in the emergency room setting, as difficulty arises managing these emotionally charged issues in
a clinic setting. Dedicated teams are most well equipped to identify
and manage these issues. It is mandatory to report these cases to social
welfare agencies.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

724.3 Upper Extremity Fractures
Jason B. Anari, Alexandre Arkader, and
Lawrence Wells

PHALANGEAL FRACTURES

Finger fractures are among the most common fracture types in children. The different phalangeal fracture patterns in children include
physeal, diaphyseal, and tuft fractures. The mechanism of injury varies from a direct blow to the finger to a finger trapped in a door (see
Chapter 722). Crush injuries of the distal phalanx manifest with severe
comminution of the underlying bone (tuft fracture), disruption of
the nail bed, and significant soft tissue injury. These injuries are best
managed with irrigation, tetanus prophylaxis, and antibiotic prophylaxis; antibiotics effective against staphylococci (e.g., first-­generation
cephalosporins) are usually appropriate, although the mechanism of
injury may warrant other antibiotic coverage. Radiographs in patients
with fingertip crush injuries should be scrutinized for evidence of a
Seymour fracture, an open physeal fracture of the distal phalanx with
possible interposition of the nail matrix. These patients are at higher
risk of nail plate deformity and infection without surgical treatment.
A mallet finger deformity is the inability to extend the distal portion

LOW-­SPECIFICITY FINDINGS
• Diaphyseal fractures of the long bones
• Simple skull fractures
• Clavicle fracture
• Subperiosteal new bone formation
From Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2019: Box 143.2, p. 1455; modified from Kleinman PK. Diagnostic Imaging of
Child Abuse, 2nd ed. St. Louis, MO: Mosby; 1998.

of the digit and is caused by a hyperflexion injury. It represents an
avulsion fracture of the physis of the distal phalanx. The treatment is
continuous splinting of the digit in extension for 6 weeks. The physeal injuries of the proximal and middle phalanx are similarly treated
with cast immobilization. The most common physeal finger fracture
results from an abduction injury to the small finger. These fractures
often require a closed reduction before immobilization. Diaphyseal
fractures may be oblique, spiral, or transverse in fracture geometry.
They are assessed for angular and rotational deformity with the finger
in flexion. The patient should be asked to make a fist. All fingers should
point toward the scaphoid. If they do not, a malrotation is suspected,
even in the presence of x-­rays in which the bones appear minimally
displaced. Malrotation or angular deformity may require correction to
avoid finger crossover and to optimize hand function. These deformities are corrected with closed reduction, and, if unstable, they need
surgical fixation with a percutaneous pin.

HAND FRACTURES

Metacarpal fractures are commonly seen in children or adolescents
who strike a person or object with a closed fist. When metacarpal fractures are not displaced, they can be managed with splinting and/or
casting. Displaced fractures are typically managed with closed reduction and casting. If reduction cannot be maintained, surgical stabilization may be required.
Fractures of carpal bones are rare in young children but become
more common in adolescence. Most carpal bones are stable and can be
treated with immobilization in a splint or cast. The scaphoid is the most
commonly fractured carpal bone and presents with tenderness at the
anatomic snuffbox. Scaphoid fractures may be difficult to visualize on
initial radiographs; if clinical suspicion for fracture is high, the patient
with negative initial radiographs should be placed in a thumb spica
splint with a plan to repeat imaging in 14-21 days.

FOREARM FRACTURES

Fractures of the wrist and forearm are very common in children,
accounting for nearly half of all fractures seen in the skeletally immature. The most common mechanism of injury is a fall on the outstretched hand. Of forearm fractures, 80% involve the distal radius
and ulna, 15% involve the middle third, and the rest are rare fractures
of the proximal third of the radius or ulnar shaft (Fig. 724.9). Most
forearm fractures in younger children are torus or greenstick fractures.
The torus fracture is an impacted fracture, and there is minimal soft
tissue swelling or hemorrhage. They may be managed in either a short

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4280 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

A

B

Fig. 724.10 A rotationally malaligned forearm fracture that initially

had good alignment but lost reduction in the cast. Note that the radial
styloid is visible, but the biceps tuberosity is not. The two should normally be 180 degrees from one another. These landmarks are sometimes hard to appreciate in children but were visible on other views in
this child.

C

D

Fig. 724.9 Common pediatric fracture patterns. A, Posteroanterior

and (B) lateral radiographs of the wrist demonstrate a buckle fracture
of the distal radial metaphysis (arrows). C, Radiograph of the forearm
demonstrates a greenstick fracture of the radial shaft, with the fracture
extending through a single cortex. D, Anteroposterior radiograph of
the forearm shows an oblique fracture through the distal radial shaft,
with plastic bowing deformity of the adjacent distal ulna. (From Walters
MM, Robertson RL, eds. Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites, 4th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017: Fig. 7.90.)

arm (below the elbow) cast or removable wrist splint and usually heal
within 3-4 weeks.
Diaphyseal fractures can be more difficult to treat because the limits
of acceptable reduction are much more stringent than for distal radial
fractures. A significant malunion of a forearm diaphyseal fracture can
lead to a permanent loss of pronation and supination, leading to functional difficulties. This is particularly true with malrotation of the fragments. Diaphyseal fractures are vulnerable to rotational malalignment
because of insertion of the pronator muscle groups and the supinator
groups. This malalignment is particularly hard to assess because the
deformity is in the axial plane and is evaluated with anteroposterior
(AP) and lateral radiographs (Fig. 724.10). The physical examination focuses on soft tissue injuries and ruling out any neurovascular
involvement. The AP and lateral radiographs of the forearm and wrist
confirm the diagnosis. Displaced and angulated fractures require
manipulative closed reduction under general anesthesia or conscious
sedation. They are immobilized in an above-­elbow cast for at least 6
weeks. Bone fractures in older children and adolescents (>10 years of
age) must be followed carefully as they often lose reduction. Loss of
reduction and unstable fractures require open reduction and internal
fixation. Fixation may be with intramedullary nails or plate fixation,
which yield similar results.

DISTAL HUMERAL FRACTURES

Fractures around the elbow receive more attention because more
aggressive management is needed to achieve an excellent result. Many
injuries are intraarticular, involve the physeal cartilage, and can result
in malunion or nonunion. Because the distal humerus develops from
a series of ossification centers, these ossification centers can be mistaken for fractures by inexperienced eyes. Careful radiographic evaluation is an essential part of diagnosing and managing distal humeral
injuries. It is important to remember that the distal humerus is only
responsible for 20% of the growth of the humerus; therefore there is
very low potential for remodeling. Observation of soft tissue swelling
and tenderness is critical to pick up subtle injuries. Common fractures include separation of the distal humeral epiphysis (transphyseal

fracture), supracondylar fractures of the distal humerus, and epiphyseal fractures of the lateral condyle or medial epicondyle. The mechanism of injury is most frequently a fall on an outstretched arm. The
physical examination includes noting the location and extent of soft
tissue swelling, ruling out any neurovascular injury, specifically anterior interosseous nerve involvement or evidence of compartment syndrome. A transphyseal fracture in a very young child who does not have
the reflex to keep the arm outstretched to break a fall should raise suspicion of child abuse. AP and lateral radiographs of the involved extremity
are necessary for the diagnosis. If the fracture is not visible, but there is
an altered relationship between the humerus and the radius and ulna
or the presence of a posterior fat pad sign, a transphyseal fracture or
an occult fracture should be suspected (Fig. 724.11). Imaging studies
such as oblique radiographs, CT, MRI, and ultrasonography may be
required for further confirmation. Displaced supracondylar fractures
may be associated with concomitant neurovascular injury (Fig. 724.12)
or, rarely, a compartment syndrome. Ulnar nerve injury is identified
by decreased sensation over the cutaneous innervation of the lateral
aspects of the hand as well as a motor deficit of abduction and adduction of the fingers. Neurologic injury may also appear in the postoperative period. Careful neurologic examination of the hand before and
after is needed to document and treat nerve injury. Most nerve injuries
associated with displaced supracondylar fractures are neuropraxias
and will resolve in several months.
In general, distal humeral fractures need restoration of anatomic
alignment. This is necessary to prevent deformity and to allow for normal growth and development. Closed reduction alone, or in association
with percutaneous fixation, is the preferred method. Open reduction is
indicated for fractures that cannot be reduced by closed methods, fractures with vascular compromise after closed reduction, open fractures,
or interarticular fractures, particularly in older children. Inadequate
reductions can lead to loss of motion, cubitus varus, cubitus valgus,
and rare nonunion or elbow instability. Elbow stiffness is not as common as in adult fractures but may occur with fractures which are severe
or intraarticular.

PROXIMAL HUMERUS FRACTURES

Fractures of the proximal humerus account for <5% of fractures in
children. They usually result from a fall onto an outstretched arm or
direct trauma. The fracture pattern tends to vary with the age group.
Physeal and metaphyseal fractures are both common. Among physeal
fractures of the proximal humerus, children younger than 5 years of
age most commonly have SH I injuries, those 5-10 years of age have
metaphyseal fractures, and children older than 11 years of age have
SH II injuries. Examination includes a thorough neurologic evaluation, especially of the axillary nerve. The diagnosis is made on AP
radiographs of the shoulder. An axillary view is obtained to rule out

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 724 u Common Fractures

4281

with closed reduction and further stabilization if unstable. Occasionally, open reduction is required because of button-­holing of the fracture spike through the deltoid or interposition of the tendon of biceps.
The majority of longitudinal growth (80%) of the limb comes from
the proximal humeral physis. Additionally, the glenohumeral joint is
capable of a large amount of motion. As such, this area is extremely
tolerant to deformity. Indications for open reduction are rare. However,
as adolescents approach adulthood, these fractures will remodel less.

CLAVICULAR FRACTURES
A

B

Fig. 724.11 Supracondylar humerus fracture. A, Lateral radiograph of

the elbow demonstrates a type II supracondylar humerus fracture, with
disruption of the anterior humeral line (black line). This line normally
passes through the middle third of the capitellum. Here the capitellum
is displaced behind the line. A large joint effusion is noted. B, Anteroposterior radiograph of the elbow shows a type III supracondylar humerus fracture. There is no cortical continuity and significant displacement and overlap of fracture fragments. (From Walters MM, Robertson
RL, eds. Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017: Fig. 7.97.)

Brachial
artery
Median
nerve

Neonatal fractures occur as a result of direct trauma during birth, most
often through a narrow pelvis or following shoulder dystocia. They
can be missed initially and can appear with pseudoparalysis. Childhood fractures are usually the result of a fall on the affected shoulder or
direct trauma to the clavicle. The most common site for fracture is the
junction of the middle and lateral third clavicle. Tenderness over the
clavicle will make the diagnosis. A thorough neurovascular examination
is important to diagnose any associated brachial plexus injury. Biceps
function is critical to assess, as it is a prognostic indicator for future
function.
An AP radiograph of the clavicle demonstrates the fracture and
can show overlap of the fragments. Physeal injuries occur through the
medial or lateral growth plate and are sometimes difficult to differentiate from dislocations of the acromioclavicular or sternoclavicular joint.
Further imaging such as a CT scan may be necessary to further define
the injury. Posterior medial clavicular physeal injuries are particularly
problematic due to their proximity to the great vessels and the trachea.
Closed versus open reduction with a cardiac/thoracic team on standby
is necessary. This can be delayed if there is no sign of vascular or respiratory compromise.
The treatment of most clavicle fractures consists of an application
of a figure-­of-8 clavicle strap or a simple sling. A figure-­of-8 strap
will extend the shoulders and minimize the amount of overlap of the
fracture fragments. Evidence exists for adults that fractures that are
shortened or displaced result in strength loss of the shoulder without
anatomic reduction and fixation. Many centers are extending that indication to older adolescents; however, a 2019 report suggests similar
satisfaction and outcomes with less complications in nonoperatively
treated adolescent clavicle fractures when compared with operatively
treated injuries. If a fracture is open, tenting the skin, or resulting in
neurovascular compromise, surgery is indicated. The physeal fractures
are treated with simple sling immobilization without any reduction
attempt. Often, anatomic alignment is not achieved, nor is it necessary.
Clavicle fractures heal rapidly, typically in 3-6 weeks. A palpable mass
of callus is usually visible in thin children, and this remodels satisfactorily in 6-12 months. Complete restoration of shoulder motion and
function is uniformly achieved.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 724.12 Posterolaterally displaced type III (extension-­type) supracondylar humeral fracture. The proximal fragment displaces anteromedially, thus placing the brachial artery and median nerve at risk. (From
Ho C. Upper extremity injuries. In: Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s Pediatric
Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 202: Fig. 29.30, p. 1194.)

any dislocation, whereas a scapular-­Y view or an axillary view assesses
angular deformity in an orthogonal plane. Many children are too
uncomfortable to tolerate an axillary view; thus, in this case, a Velpeau
axillary can be obtained while the arm remains in a sling. SH I injuries do not require reduction because they have excellent remodeling
capacity, and simple immobilization in a sling for 2-3 weeks is sufficient. Metaphyseal fractures usually do not need reduction unless the
angulation is >50 degrees. In general, sling immobilization is all that
is required. SH II fractures with <30 degrees of angulation and <50%
displacement are managed in a sling. Displaced fractures are treated

724.4 Lower Extremity Fractures
Jason B. Anari, Alexandre Arkader, and
Lawrence Wells

HIP FRACTURES

Hip fractures in children account for <1% of all pediatric fractures.
These injuries result from high-­energy trauma and can be associated
with injury to the chest, head, or abdomen. Treatment of hip fractures
in children is associated with a complication rate of up to 60%, including an overall avascular necrosis rate of 50% and a malunion rate of up
to 30%. The unique blood supply to the femoral head accounts for the
high rate of avascular necrosis. Fractures are classified by the Delbet
classification as transphyseal separations, transcervical fractures, cervicotrochanteric fractures, and intertrochanteric fractures. The management principles include urgent anatomic reduction (either open or
closed), stable internal fixation (avoiding the physis if possible), and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4282 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
spica casting if the child is younger. Urgent management has been associated with a lower rate of avascular necrosis and superior overall outcomes. Capsular decompression also has been advocated as decreasing
overall pressure on the epiphyseal vessels and has been demonstrated
experimentally; the clinical results, however, remain mixed.

fractures heal well, and children usually have excellent results. Open
fractures need to undergo irrigation and debridement as well as antibiotic treatment. The tibia is a subcutaneous bone, so if severe soft tissue
loss occurs with an open fracture, the patient may need plastic surgery
consultation. Definitive external fixation versus internal fixation and
simultaneous soft tissue coverage are alternative treatment strategies to
minimize infection. Tibia fractures are associated with compartment
syndrome. Vigilance is necessary to avoid disastrous outcomes associated with missed compartment syndrome. Emergent fasciotomy is
indicated as soon as compartment syndrome is diagnosed. Several return
trips to the operating room are often necessary to close, versus cover,
the fasciotomy wounds.

FEMORAL SHAFT FRACTURES

Fractures of the femur in children are common. All age groups, from
early childhood to adolescence, can be affected. The mechanism of
injury varies from low-­energy twisting type injuries to high-­velocity
injuries in vehicular accidents. Femur fractures in children younger
than age 2 years should raise concern for child abuse. A thorough physical examination is necessary to rule out other injuries and assess the
neurovascular status. In the case of high-­energy trauma, any signs of
hemodynamic instability should prompt the examiner to look for other
sources of bleeding. AP and lateral radiographs of the femur demonstrate the fracture. An AP radiograph of the pelvis is obtained to rule
out any associated pelvic fracture. Treatment of shaft fractures varies
with the age group, as described in Table 724.3.

TODDLER FRACTURES

PROXIMAL TIBIA FRACTURES

Toddler fractures occur in young ambulatory children. The age range
for this fracture is typically around 1-4 years (Fig. 724.13). The injury
often occurs after a seemingly harmless twist or fall and is often unwitnessed. It is a result of a torsional injury. The children in this age group
are usually unable to articulate the mechanism of injury clearly or to
describe the area of injury well. The radiographs may show no fracture;
in these cases, the diagnosis is made by physical examination. The classic symptom is refusal to bear weight, which can manifest as pulling up
the affected extremity or florid display of protest. The other common
sign is point tenderness at the fracture site. The AP and lateral views of
the tibia-­fibula might show a nondisplaced spiral fracture of the distal
tibial metaphysis. An oblique view is often helpful because the fracture
line may be visible in only one of the three views. Often the fracture

TIBIA AND FIBULA SHAFT FRACTURES

A

Proximal tibia fractures can be physeal injuries, metaphyseal injuries,
or avulsion injuries of the tibial spine or tubercle. Physeal injuries can
be either isolated or as part of tibial tubercle fracture. If the distal segment is displaced posteriorly the trifurcation of the popliteal vessels
may be involved. Careful neurovascular examination is warranted both
pre-­and postreduction. Anatomic reduction and pin fixation is preferred with unstable fractures or displaced SH III or IV fractures.
Proximal tibial metaphyseal fractures, or the Cozen fracture, are
most common in the 3-­to 6-­year-­old age group. They may result in
a late valgus deformity even if anatomically reduced. This deformity
tends to remodel within 1-2 years but can cause great distress to parents and treating clinicians.
Tibial eminence fractures are fractures of the bony prominence that
is the attachment of the anterior cruciate ligament. The mechanism of
injury is similar to an anterior cruciate ligament tear in an adult. Displaced fractures require surgical reduction and fixation. This may be
done either open or arthroscopically.
Tibial tubercle fractures are common in patients with Osgood-­
Schlatter syndrome. Care must be taken to observe for compartment
syndrome as the injury is associated with injury of the recurrent anterior tibial artery. The injury may be treated nonoperatively if the fracture is displaced <2 mm and the patient has no extensor lag (rare).
Open reduction and internal fixation is preferred otherwise.
The tibia is the most commonly fractured bone of the lower limb in
children. This fracture generally results from a direct injury. Most
tibial fractures are associated with a fibular fracture, and the mean
age of presentation is 8 years. The child presents with pain, swelling,
and deformity of the affected leg and is unable to bear weight. Distal
neurovascular examination is important in assessment. The AP and
lateral radiographs should include the knee and ankle. Closed reduction and immobilization are the standard method of treatment. Most

B

Fig. 724.13 Toddler’s fracture of the tibia in a 2-­yr-­old child present-

ing with a limp and no history of trauma. A, Lateral radiograph of the
lower leg shows a subtle, nondisplaced, oblique fracture through the
tibial shaft (arrows). B, Anteroposterior radiograph obtained 10 days
later shows healing, with subperiosteal new bone formation along the
tibial shaft (arrows). (From Walters MM, Robertson RL, eds. Pediatric
Radiology: The Requisites, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017: Fig.
7.117, p. 256.)

Table 724.3  Femoral Shaft Fracture: Treatment Options by Age
TREATMENT OPTIONS
Spica cast
Traction and spica cast

0-2 YR

3-5 YR

x

x
x

6-10 YR

>11 YR

x

x

Intramedullary rod

x

x

x

External fixator

x*

x*

x*

Screw or plate

x

x

x

*Open fracture.
Modified from Wells L. Trauma related to the lower extremity. In: Dormans JP, ed. Pediatric Orthopaedics: Core Knowledge in Orthopaedics. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2005:93.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 724 u Common Fractures

4283

line is not visualized until 2-3 weeks later, when periosteal reaction and
resorption at the fracture site allow better visualization. Inflammatory
markers may be ordered to rule out infectious processes if the diagnosis is in doubt. Bone scans were employed in the past but impart a large
amount of radiation to the child. The fracture can be safely treated with
a below-­knee cast or a controlled ankle motion (CAM) walking boot
for approximately 3 weeks.

TRIPLANE AND TILLAUX FRACTURES

Triplane and Tillaux fracture patterns occur at the end of the growth
period and are based on relative strength of the bone-­physis junction
and asymmetric closure of the tibial physis. The triplane fractures are
so named because the injury has coronal, sagittal, and transverse components (Fig. 724.14). The Tillaux fracture is an avulsion fracture of the
anterolateral aspect of the distal tibial epiphysis. Radiographs and further imaging with CT and three-­dimensional reconstructions are necessary to analyze the fracture geometry. The triplane fracture involves
the articular surface and hence anatomic reduction is necessary. The
reduction is further stabilized with internal fixation. The Tillaux fracture is treated by closed reduction. Open reduction is recommended if
a residual intraarticular step-­off persists.

METATARSAL FRACTURES

Metatarsal fractures are common in children. They usually result from
direct trauma to the dorsum of the foot. High-­energy trauma or multiple fractures of the metatarsal base are associated with significant
swelling. A high index for compartment syndrome of the foot must be
maintained and compartment pressures must be measured if indicated.
Diagnosis is obtained by AP, lateral, and oblique radiographs of the
foot. Most metatarsal fractures can be treated by closed methods in a
below-­knee cast or walking boot. Weight-­bearing is allowed as tolerated. The Jones fracture of the proximal fifth metatarsal is an exception
as it lies at a watershed area of vascular supply and thus has an increased
risk of nonunion. Patients with Jones fractures should initially be non-­
weightbearing and should be referred to an orthopedics specialist.
Displaced fractures can require closed or open reduction with internal
fixation. Percutaneous, smooth Kirschner wires (K-­wires) generally
provide sufficient internal fixation for these injuries.

TOE PHALANGEAL FRACTURES

Fractures of the lesser toes are common and are usually secondary to
direct blows. They commonly occur when the child is barefoot. The
toes are swollen, ecchymotic, and tender. There may be a mild deformity. Diagnosis is made radiographically. Bleeding suggests the possibility of an open fracture. The lesser toes usually do not require closed
reduction unless significantly displaced. If necessary, reduction can
usually be accomplished with longitudinal traction on the toe. Casting is not usually necessary. Buddy taping of the fractured toe to an
adjacent stable toe usually provides satisfactory alignment and relief
of symptoms. Crutches and heel walking may be beneficial for several
days until the soft tissue swelling and the discomfort decrease.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

724.5 Operative Treatment of Fractures
Jason B. Anari, Alexandre Arkader, and
Lawrence Wells
Surgery is required for 4–5% of pediatric fractures. The common indications for operative treatment in children and adolescents include
displaced physeal fractures, displaced intraarticular fractures, unstable
fractures, multiple injuries, open fractures, failure to achieve adequate
reduction in older children, failure to maintain an adequate reduction,
and certain pathologic fractures.
The aim of operative intervention is to obtain anatomic alignment
and relative stability. Rigid fixation is not necessary as it is in adults for
early mobilization. The relatively stable construct can be supplemented

A

B

Fig. 724.14 The triplane fracture is a transitional fracture: anteroposterior (A) and lateral (B) radiographs. (From Dormans JP. Pediatric Orthopedics: Introduction to Trauma. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2005:38.)

Table 724.4  Common Indications for External Fixation in
Pediatric Fractures
Grades II and III open fractures
Fractures associated with severe burns
Fractures with soft tissue loss requiring free flaps or skin grafts
Fractures requiring distractions such as those with significant bone
loss
Unstable pelvic fractures
Fractures in children with associated head injuries and spasticity
Fractures associated with vascular or nerve repairs or reconstruction

with external immobilization such as a cast, splint, or CAM walking
boot. SH types III and IV injuries require anatomic alignment, and if
they are unstable, internal fixation is used (smooth K-­wires, preferably
avoiding the course across the growth plate). Multiple closed reductions of an epiphyseal fracture are contraindicated because they can
cause permanent damage to the physis.

SURGICAL TECHNIQUES

It is important to take great care with soft tissues and skin. The other
indications for open reduction and internal fixation are unstable fractures of the spine, ipsilateral fractures of the femur and tibia, neurovascular injuries requiring repair, and open fractures. Closed reduction
and minimally invasive fixation are specifically used for supracondylar
fractures of the distal humerus and most phalangeal fractures. Failure
to obtain anatomic alignment by closed means is an indication for
an open reduction. Percutaneous techniques such as intramedullary
fixation and minimally invasive plate osteosynthesis are increasingly
popular as well.
As children become older, surgical techniques become more similar to adult techniques. The classic example of this is the femoral shaft
fracture. Newborns may be treated with a soft dressing or Pavlik harness; young children may have a spica cast; older children will often be
treated with flexible nails. Adolescents will frequently be treated with
rigid intramedullary fixation similar to their adult counterparts.
Table 724.4 summarizes the main indications for external fixation.
The advantages of external fixation include rigid immobilization of
the fractures, access to open wounds for continued management, and
easier patient mobilization for treatment of other injuries and transportation for diagnostic and therapeutic procedures. The majority of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4284 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
complications with external fixation are pin tract infections, chronic
osteomyelitis, and refractures after pin removal.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

724.6 Complications of Fractures in Children
Jason B. Anari, Alexandre Arkader, and
Lawrence Wells
Complications of fractures in children can be categorized as (1)
complications of the injury itself, (2) complications of treatment,
and (3) late complications resulting from growth disturbance or
deformity.

COMPLICATIONS RESULTING FROM INJURY

Growth arrest is possible in physeal fractures, particularly widely
displaced physeal fractures about the distal femur, proximal tibia, or
distal ulna. Fractures about the hip may cause avascular necrosis or
premature physeal closure, particularly when the fracture involves the
proximal femoral physis. Unacceptable alignment may cause loss of
motion or limb malalignment. Fracture malunion may cause cosmetically unappealing bumps or curves in the limb, and at times functional
impairment. Compartment syndrome can occur, particularly in
diaphyseal tibia fractures or high energy or open both bone forearm
fractures. Supracondylar humerus fractures, distal femur fractures,
and proximal tibia fractures may result in neurovascular compromise.
Nonunions are rare in children but can be seen with intraarticular
fractures, such as distal humerus lateral condyle fractures. Malunions
or missed Monteggia fracture dislocations about the elbow can cause
permanent stiffness and loss of function if the deformity is not corrected. Displaced intraarticular fractures can result in posttraumatic
arthritis and early joint degeneration. Open fractures can result in
infection and osteomyelitis if inadequately treated. Older children with
severe injuries of the lower extremity can be vulnerable to deep vein
thrombosis.

COMPLICATIONS OF TREATMENT

Treatment may complicate fractures. Cast immobilization can
result in cast ulcers, either from inadequate padding of bony prominences or from patients placing objects in the cast. Casts that are
too tight can cause neurovascular compromise and compartment
syndrome. Patients can get cast saw burns from using cast saws that
are too dull to remove the cast. Safe operation of a cast saw requires
monitoring of blade temperature. The saw blade should be intermittently cooled by taking a break to avoid overheating and thermal
injury to the skin. Improperly placed casts can promote fracture
displacement and malunion. Surgical treatment can be complicated
by blood loss, neurovascular compromise, iatrogenic physeal damage, and hardware complications such as infection or hardware failure. Symptomatic hardware may require later removal.

LATE COMPLICATIONS OF TRAUMA

Late effects of trauma can be from partial or complete closure of the
physis or malunion of the fracture. This can lead to limb angular deformity, shortening, or incongruency. Angular deformities can be treated
by hemiepiphysiodesis or osteotomy. Joint incongruency may be a very
difficult problem to deal with and may ultimately lead to early degenerative joint disease. Reflex sympathetic dystrophy is another poorly
understood late effect of trauma but can be debilitating. Distal radius
fractures have an above average rate of reflex sympathetic dystrophy
relative to other injuries. Physical and occupational therapists are very
helpful in managing this condition. Limited evidence exists that vitamin C may be useful in the acute setting of high-­risk injuries to prevent
this complication.

Chapter 725

Osteomyelitis
Samir S. Shah
Osteomyelitis, or infection of the bone, may be classified as acute or
chronic. These clinical definitions correspond with treatment recommendations. Acute osteomyelitis is defined as the diagnosis of bone
infection within 4 weeks after onset of clinical signs or symptoms in
a previously uninfected bone. Chronic osteomyelitis is defined as a
protracted and indolent disease process with presence of a sequestrum
or relapse of infection at the same site following apparently successful
treatment; sequestra may arise as a complication of treated or untreated
acute hematogenous osteomyelitis.

ETIOLOGY

Bacteria are the most common pathogens in acute skeletal infections.
Staphylococcus aureus (see Chapter 227.1) is the most common infecting organism in osteomyelitis among all age groups, including newborns. The prevalence of community-­acquired methicillin-­resistant S.
aureus (CA-­MRSA) as a cause of osteomyelitis varies substantially by
region.
Group B streptococcus (see Chapter 230) and gram-­negative enteric
bacilli (Escherichia coli, see Chapter 246) are prominent pathogens in
neonates; group A streptococcus (see Chapter 229) constitutes <10%
of all cases in this group. After 6 years of age, most cases of osteomyelitis are caused by S. aureus, group A streptococci, or Pseudomonas
aeruginosa (see Chapter 251.1). Cases of Pseudomonas infection are
related almost exclusively to puncture wounds of the foot, with direct
inoculation of P. aeruginosa from the foam padding of the shoe into
bone or cartilage, which develops as osteochondritis. Salmonella spp.
(see Chapter 244) and S. aureus are the two most common causes of
osteomyelitis in children with sickle cell disease (see Chapter 511.1).
Streptococcus pneumoniae (see Chapter 228) most commonly causes
osteomyelitis in children younger than 24 months of age and in children with sickle cell disease, but its frequency has declined because
of pneumococcal conjugate vaccines. Bartonella henselae (see Chapter
255) can cause osteomyelitis of any bone but is most often seen in pelvic and vertebral bones.
Kingella kingae (see Chapter 239) is the second most common cause
of osteomyelitis in children younger than 4 years of age. The organism
causes osteomyelitis, spondylodiscitis, and septic arthritis (see Chapter
726) in this age group, especially when there is a subacute presentation.
K. kingae can be difficult to detect unless polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) testing is used.
Infection with atypical mycobacteria (see Chapter 263), S. aureus, or
Pseudomonas can occur after penetrating injuries. These organisms, as
well as coagulase-­negative staphylococci or gram-­negative enteric bacteria, may cause bone infection related to implanted materials such as
orthopedic hardware. Fungal infections usually occur as part of multisystem disseminated disease; Candida (see Chapter 280) osteomyelitis
sometimes complicates fungemia in neonates with or without indwelling vascular catheters. Blastomycosis causes multiple bone lesions in
endemic areas.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The median age of children with musculoskeletal infections is approximately 6 years. Bone infections are more common in males than
females.
Minor closed trauma is a common preceding event in cases of osteomyelitis, occurring in approximately 30% of patients. Impaired host
defenses (e.g., hemoglobinopathies, human immunodeficiency virus,
or chronic granulomatous disease) also increase the risk of skeletal
infection. Table 725.1 lists other risk factors.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 725 u Osteomyelitis
Table 725.1  Microorganisms Isolated from Patients with
Osteomyelitis and Their Clinical Associations
MOST COMMON CLINICAL
ASSOCIATION

MICROORGANISM

Frequent microorganism in any
type of osteomyelitis

Staphylococcus aureus
(susceptible or resistant to
methicillin)

Associated with septic arthritis,
spondylodiscitis, long or
unusual bones, age <4 yr, mild
symptoms

Kingella kingae

Foreign body–associated
infection

Coagulase-­negative
staphylococci, other skin flora,
atypical mycobacteria, fungi

Common in nosocomial
infections

Enterobacteriaceae,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
Candida spp.

Decubitus ulcer or ulceration
associated with sensory
autonomic neuropathies

S. aureus, streptococci, gram-­
negative enterics, and/
or anaerobic bacteria;
polymicrobial infections are
common

Sickle cell disease

Salmonella spp., S. aureus, or
Streptococcus pneumoniae

Exposure to kittens

Bartonella henselae

Human or animal bites

Pasteurella multocida or
Eikenella corrodens

Immunocompromised patients

Aspergillus spp., Candida
albicans, or Mycobacteria spp.

Populations in which tuberculosis
is prevalent

Mycobacterium tuberculosis

Populations in which these
pathogens are endemic

Brucella spp., Coxiella
burnetii, fungi found in
specific geographic areas
(coccidioidomycosis,
blastomycosis, histoplasmosis)

Modified from Lew DP, Waldvogel FA. Osteomyelitis. Lancet. 2004;364:369–379.

PATHOGENESIS

Bacteria reach bone matrices most commonly via hematogenous
spread (primary bacteremia). Less common mechanisms include
direct inoculation (i.e., trauma or procedures) or contiguous spread
from infection of adjacent sites such as synovial fluid or soft tissues.
The unique anatomy and circulation of the ends of long bones result
in the predilection for localization of bloodborne bacteria. In the
metaphysis, nutrient arteries branch into non-anastomosing capillaries under the physis, which make a sharp loop before entering venous
sinusoids draining into the marrow. Low-­velocity blood flow in this
area predisposes to bacterial invasion. Once a bacterial focus is established, phagocytes migrate to the site and produce an inflammatory
exudate (metaphyseal abscess). The generation of proteolytic enzymes,
toxic oxygen radicals, and cytokines results in decreased oxygen tension, decreased pH, osteolysis, and tissue destruction. As the inflammatory exudate progresses, pressure increases spread through the
porous metaphyseal space via the Haversian system and Volkmann
canals into the subperiosteal space. Purulence beneath the periosteum
may lift the periosteal membrane of the bony surface, further impairing blood supply to the cortex and metaphysis.
In newborns and young infants, transphyseal blood vessels connect the metaphysis and epiphysis, so it is common for pus from the
metaphysis to enter the joint space. This extension through the physis

4285

has the potential to result in abnormal growth and bone or joint deformity. During the latter part of the first year of life, the physis forms,
obliterating the transphyseal blood vessels. Joint involvement can
occur where the metaphysis is intraarticular (hip, ankle, shoulder, and
elbow), and subperiosteal pus ruptures into the joint space.
In later childhood, the periosteum becomes more adherent, favoring pus to decompress through the periosteum. Once the growth plate
closes in late adolescence, hematogenous osteomyelitis more often
begins in the diaphysis and can spread to the entire intramedullary
canal. Septic arthritis contiguous with a site of osteomyelitis is also seen
in older children with S. aureus osteomyelitis, which may be related to
simultaneous hematogenous inoculation of bone and joint space. Septic arthritis may also result from infected material entering the synovial
space from an adjacent osteomyelitis.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The earliest signs and symptoms of acute osteomyelitis, often subtle
and nonspecific, generally depend on patient age. Neonates might
exhibit pseudoparalysis or pain with movement of the affected extremity (e.g., diaper changes). Half of neonates do not have fever and might
not appear ill. Older infants and children are more likely to have pain,
fever, and localizing signs such as edema, erythema, and warmth. With
involvement of the lower extremities, limp or refusal to walk is seen in
approximately half of patients.
Focal tenderness over a long bone can be an important finding. Local
swelling and redness with osteomyelitis suggests spread of infection
beyond the metaphysis and into the subperiosteal space, representing
a secondary soft tissue inflammatory response. Pelvic osteomyelitis can
manifest with subtle findings such as hip, thigh, groin, or abdominal
pain. Vertebral osteomyelitis typically presents as back pain with or without tenderness to palpation over the vertebral processes (Chapter 720.7).
Long bones are principally involved in osteomyelitis (Table 725.2);
the femur and tibia are equally affected and together constitute almost
half of all cases. The bones of the upper extremities account for 25% of
all cases. Flat bones are less commonly affected.
Usually, a single site of bone or joint is involved, although multifocal
osteomyelitis may be noted in up to 20% of children with S. aureus infections. In neonates, two or more bones are involved in almost half of the
cases. Multifocal disease may also be seen with tuberculosis, cat-­scratch
disease, and brucellosis. Clinical manifestations of chronic infection are
more indolent, and fever is unusual. Children with subacute symptoms
and focal findings in the metaphyseal area (usually of the tibia) might
have a Brodie abscess, with a well-­defined radiographic lucency and
surrounding reactive bone. The contents of Brodie abscesses are often
sterile, but S. aureus is often the most common pathogen (Fig. 725.1).
Some patients with osteomyelitis due to S. aureus infection develop a
deep venous thrombosis adjacent to the affected bone that can produce
septic pulmonary emboli; these patients are often critically ill. Uncomplicated disease should be distinguished from more complicated osteomyelitis (Table 725.3).

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of osteomyelitis begins with clinical suspicion and
requires appropriate cultures and imaging studies. Blood cultures
should be performed in all suspected cases before administration of antibiotic therapy. Blood cultures are positive in ∼30% of patients. Blood
culture contamination rates are low, generally <5%; microbes such
as coagulase-­negative staphylococci, α-­streptococci (except S. pneumoniae and S. anginosus group), Bacillus species, Corynebacterium,
and Cutibacterium are usually considered contaminants when identified in blood culture from a patient with acute or subacute hematogenous osteomyelitis.
Depending on the results of imaging studies, aspiration or biopsy
of bone or subperiosteal abscess for Gram stain, standard bacterial
culture, PCR for K. kingae, and possibly bone histology provides the
optimal specimen for culture to confirm the diagnosis and significantly
increases the yield compared with blood culture alone. These specimens, which identify a causative bacteria in ∼60% of cases, are often
obtained by the interventional radiologist or at the time of surgical

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4286 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 725.2  Site of Involvement in Acute Hematogenous
Osteomyelitis
SITE

%

TUBULAR BONE
Femur

25

Tibia

24

Humerus

13

Phalanges

5

Fibula

4

Radius

4

Ulna

2

Metatarsal

2

Clavicle

0.5

Metacarpal

0.5

CUBOIDAL BONE
Calcaneus

5

Talus

0.8

Carpals

0.5

Cuneiform

0.5

Cuboid

0.3

IRREGULAR BONE
Ischium

4

Ilium

2

Vertebra

2

Pubis

0.8

Sacrum

0.8

FLAT BONE
Skull

1

Rib

0.5

Sternum

0.5

Scapula

0.5

Maxilla

0.3

Mandible

0.3

Data from Krogstad P. Osteomyelitis. In: Cherry JD, Harrison GJ, Kaplan SL, et al., eds.
Feigin and Cherry’s Textbook of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, 8th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier, 2019: Table 55.2.

drainage by the orthopedic surgeon. Direct inoculation of clinical
specimens into aerobic blood culture bottles can improve the recovery
of K. kingae, particularly if held for 1 week. PCR is the most sensitive
technique to detect K. kingae, even up to 6 days after antibiotics are
initiated. Anaerobic, fungal, and mycobacterial cultures may be performed if risk factors are identified by history or physical examination.
There are no specific laboratory tests for osteomyelitis. Laboratory evaluation of children with suspected osteomyelitis may include a complete
blood count and C-­reactive protein (CRP). A complete blood count may
contribute to assessment of infection severity (e.g., anemia, thrombocytopenia) and suggest an alternative diagnosis (e.g., hematologic malignancy).
The initial CRP is elevated in most children with acute osteomyelitis. CRP
is nonspecific and does not establish the diagnosis of osteomyelitis, but
serial monitoring of an elevated CRP may be of value in assessing response
to therapy or identifying complications. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
(ESR) is no longer routinely recommended in cases of acute hematogenous osteomyelitis. Data on procalcitonin are insufficient.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION

Radiographic studies play a crucial role in the evaluation of osteomyelitis. Conventional radiographs and MRI are the primary modalities.
Ultrasonography, CT, and radionuclide studies can also contribute to
establishing the diagnosis in selected cases.

Plain Radiographs

Within 72 hours of onset of symptoms of osteomyelitis, plain radiographs of the involved site using soft tissue technique and compared
with the opposite extremity, if necessary, can show displacement of
the deep muscle planes from the adjacent metaphysis caused by deep-­
tissue edema. Lytic bone changes are not visible on radiographs until
30–50% of the bony matrix is destroyed. Tubular long bones do not
show lytic changes for 7-14 days after onset of infection. Infection in
flat and irregular bones can take longer to appear. Radiographs in children with possible osteomyelitis are important to exclude other possible causes (e.g., fracture) of the presenting symptoms and signs.

Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Computed
Tomography

MRI is more sensitive than CT or radionuclide imaging in acute osteomyelitis and is the best radiographic imaging technique for identifying
abscesses and for differentiating between bone and soft tissue infection. MRI provides precise anatomic detail of subperiosteal pus and
accumulation of purulent debris in the bone marrow and metaphyses
for possible surgical intervention. In acute osteomyelitis, purulent
debris and edema appear dark, with decreased signal intensity on T1-­
weighted images, with fat appearing bright (Figs. 725.2 and 725.3). The
opposite is seen in T2-­weighted images. The signal from fat can be
diminished with fat-­suppression techniques to enhance visualization.
Gadolinium administration can also enhance MRI. Cellulitis and sinus
tracts appear as areas of high signal intensity on T2-­weighted images.
Short tau inversion recovery (STIR) MRI is a rapid imaging modality
for osteomyelitis (Fig. 725.4). MRI can also demonstrate contiguous
or isolated septic arthritis, pyomyositis, or venous thrombosis. Whole
body rapid STIR MRI is an effective alternative to radionuclide imaging
where multiple sites of infection are suspected or the site of infection cannot be clearly localized on exam. CT can demonstrate osseous and soft
tissue abnormalities and is ideal for detecting gas in soft tissues but has
poor sensitivity for detecting the presence of osteomyelitis.

Radionuclide Studies

Radionuclide imaging, an alternative to MRI, may be useful if multiple
foci are suspected. Technetium-99 (99mTc) methylene diphosphonate,
which accumulates in areas of increased bone turnover, is the preferred agent for radionuclide bone imaging (three-­phase bone scan).
Any areas of increased blood flow or inflammation can cause increased
uptake of 99mTc in the first and second phases, but osteomyelitis causes
increased uptake of 99mTc in the third phase (4-6 hours). Three-­phase
imaging with 99mTc has excellent sensitivity (84–100%) and specificity
(70–96%) in hematogenous osteomyelitis and can detect osteomyelitis
within 24-48 hours after onset of symptoms. The sensitivity in neonates is much lower because of poor bone mineralization. Advantages
include infrequent need for sedation and the ability to image the entire
skeleton for detection of multiple foci. Disadvantages include exposure
to radiation, inability to image surrounding soft tissues, and overall
lack of detail, which limits the tests’ utility for preoperative planning.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Distinguishing osteomyelitis from cellulitis or trauma (unintentional or
abuse) may be difficult, particularly when the history is limited. Myositis or
pyomyositis can also appear similar to osteomyelitis with fever, warm and
swollen extremities, and limping; tenderness to palpation of the affected
soft tissue area is generally more diffuse than noted in acute osteomyelitis.
Myositis and pyomyositis may be isolated but are often found adjacent to
an osteomyelitis on MRI. Pyomyositis is most often caused by S. aureus,
followed by group A streptococcus. The pelvic muscles are a common site
of pyomyositis and can mimic a pelvic osteomyelitis. MRI is the definitive

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 725 u Osteomyelitis

4287

*

*
A

C

B

Fig. 725.1 A, Radiograph demonstrates a lytic lesion in the proximal fibula with laminated thick periostitis. Axial T2-­weighted fat-­saturated MR

image (B) shows a layered appearance with intermediate signal (arrowhead) between inner and outer rims of lower signal intensity (arrows) and a
more central hyperintense region. Also note the soft tissue phlegmon/early abscess formation (asterisk). On an axial T1-­weighted, fat-­saturated,
postgadolinium MR image (C), a rim of low signal sclerosis (outer arrow) surrounds an inner rim of enhancing granulation tissue (inner arrow), which
surrounds the nonenhancing abscess. (From Kan JH, Meyers AB, Azouz EM. Musculoskeletal infections. In: Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 137.17.)

Table 725.3  Characteristics of Uncomplicated vs Complicated Osteomyelitis*
CHARACTERISTIC

UNCOMPLICATED

COMPLICATED

Sites of infection

Single bone

Two or more bones involved
Additional soft tissue sites of infection
beyond the bone (e.g., muscle [myositis or
pyomyositis], pneumonia, and liver abscess)

Clinical response to medical and surgical
treatment

Rapid (within 3-5 days), including signs of sepsis
or septic shock

Slow, prolonged response, or lack of clinical
response
Need for more than one surgery for source
control

Course of bacteremia when present

Rapid resolution of bacteremia (serial blood
cultures become negative when obtained
within 1-2 days after the initiation of therapy
and source control)

Prolonged bacteremia (3 or more days),
suggestive of uncontrolled infection/distant
site(s) of infection

Acute sequelae of infection

None

Venous thrombosis or septic thrombophlebitis
Endocarditis

Late sequelae of infection

No findings that suggest risk of physis injury
or other short-­or long-­term osteoarticular
sequelae of infection

Findings concerning for physeal injury with
potential impacts on bone growth with long-­
term sequelae
Presence of or concern for pathologic fracture

*This set of criteria is consensus based with primary focus on clinical findings and course. It may be reasonable to include additional laboratory tests such as the serum C-­reactive
protein (CRP) in making a determination of an uncomplicated vs complicated course. Concepts such as (1) rapid fall of the CRP concentration within 48 hr of initiation of treatment
or (2) a 50% or more decline from peak CRP concentration within 3-5 days of admission or first surgical debridement may be considered. Further research into the various
components and functionality of this definition, and any added utility of the CRP or other laboratory markers, will have value and is encouraged.
From Woods CR, Bradley JS, Chatterjee A, et al. Clinical practice guideline by the Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society of America: 2021 guideline on diagnosis and management of
acute hematogenous osteomyelitis in pediatrics. J Pediatric Infect Dis Soc. 2021;10(8):801–844. Table 1.

study to identify and localize pelvic pyomyositis (Fig. 725.5). An iliopsoas
abscess can manifest with thigh pain, limp, and fever and must be considered in the differential diagnosis of osteomyelitis. The iliopsoas abscess
may be primary (hematogenous: S. aureus) or secondary to infection in
adjacent bone (S. aureus), kidney (E. coli) or intestine (E. coli, Bacteroides
spp.). Mycobacterium tuberculosis has been reported in patients with HIV
infection. Any child with negative x-­ray imaging and a negative hip aspiration who presents with fever, limp, and elevated inflammatory markers
should be evaluated for pyomyositis.
Appendicitis, urinary tract infection, and gynecologic disease are
among the conditions in the differential diagnosis of pelvic osteomyelitis. Children with leukemia commonly have bone pain or joint pain
as an early symptom. Neuroblastoma with bone involvement may be
mistaken for osteomyelitis. Primary bone tumors need to be considered, but fever and other signs of illness are generally absent except in
Ewing sarcoma. In patients with sickle cell disease, distinguishing bone
infection from infarction may be challenging.

Chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis (CRMO) (also called
chronic nonbacterial osteomyelitis, CNO) is a nonpyrogenic, sterile
inflammatory bone disease that is considered an autoinflammatory disorder (see Chapter 204). It may also be associated with a family history
of autoimmune disease; the affected patient may have other inflammatory diseases such as Crohn disease, Sweet syndrome, psoriasis, and
palmar plantar pustulosis. CRMO in children has many similarities
with synovitis, acne, pustulosis, hyperostosis, and osteitis syndrome
(SAPHO), seen in adults. CRMO also has similarities to Majeed syndrome, an autosomal recessive disorder with a microcytic dyserythropoietic anemia, and with a deficiency of interleukin-1 receptor
antagonist (DIRA), an autosomal recessive autoinflammatory disease.
In contrast to infectious osteomyelitis, CRMO is multifocal, recurrent, and may involve bones not typical of osteomyelitis (spine, pelvis,
clavicle, mandible, and calcaneus). Plain radiographs reveal osteolytic
lesions or sclerosis; whole body STIR MRI imaging is the diagnostic
study of choice (Fig. 725.6).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4288 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

A

B
Fig. 725.2 MRI of an 8-­year-­old female with acute pelvic hematog-

enous osteomyelitis. A, Axial T1-­weighted contrast-­enhanced MRI with
fat saturation reveals a nonenhancing fluid collection adjacent to the
inflamed pubic synchondrosis. B, The fluid collection appears hyperintense on the corresponding T2-­weighted image (arrowheads). In addition, a contrast enhancement within the adjacent internal obturator
muscle is seen (arrow), indicating acute pelvic hematogenous osteomyelitis with complicating adjacent abscess formation and soft tissue
inflammation. (From Weber-­Chrysochoou C, Corti N, Goetschel P, et al.
Pelvic osteomyelitis: a diagnostic challenge in children. J Pediatr Surg.
2007;42:553–557.)

Fig. 725.4 Coronal STIR MR image demonstrates a salt-­and-­pepper

appearance of marrow edema and periosteal reaction (arrow). (From
Kan JH, Azouz EM. Musculoskeletal infections. In: Coley BD, ed.
Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2019: Fig. 137.14.)

A
A

B

Fig. 725.3 Acute osteomyelitis of the distal femur in a 5-­yr-­old male.

A, T2-­weighted fat-­saturated axial MRI shows a large subperiosteal abscess (arrows) at the posterior aspect of the femur. Increased signal is
seen within the bone, and there is adjacent soft tissue edema. B, T1-­
weighted fat-­saturated postgadolinium sagittal MRI shows the longitudinal extent of the subperiosteal abscess with enhancing wall (arrows).
(From Kan JH, Azouz EM. Musculoskeletal infections. In: Coley BD, ed.
Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2019: Fig. 137.13.)

Pain in CRMO is usually insidious and noted at night; fever is not
always present. The mean age of onset is 10 years. The CRP may be
elevated but is not as high as in bacterial osteomyelitis. Pain usually
responds to nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs. Second-­line treatments include systemic corticosteroids or tumor necrosis factor-­α
inhibitors.

B
Fig. 725.5 A, Pelvic pyomyositis in a 10-­yr-­old male presenting with

limping. Pelvis MRI demonstrates an avid contrast enhancement of the
internal obturator muscle (arrowhead) with an abscess on T1-­weighted
fat-­saturated postcontrast axial image (arrow). B, Pyomyositis in a 7-­yr-­old
male with left pelvic pain and fever. Axial T1 fat-­saturated postcontrast
image through the inferior ramus of the obturator ring demonstrates multiloculated, rim-­enhancing fluid collections in the adductor muscles (arrow), which is characteristic of pyomyositis. (A from Bartoloni A, Gómez
A, Pilar M, et al. Imaging of the limping child. Eur J Radiol. 2018;109:155–
170. Fig 13; B from Pruthi S, Thapa MM. Infectious and inflammatory disorders. Magn Reson Imaging Clin North Am. 2009;17:423. Fig 7.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 725 u Osteomyelitis

A

B

4289

C

Fig. 725.6 MRI in a patient with chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis. A, Whole body image showing multiple foci of osteomyelitis (arrows),

some of which are distributed symmetrically. B, Image of the ankle showing inflammatory metaphyseal and epiphyseal lesions. C, Image of the left
femur showing involvement of the diaphysis with a soft tissue reaction. (From Wipff J, Adamsbaum C, Kahan A, Job-­Deslandre C. Chronic recurrent
multifocal osteomyelitis. Joint Bone Spine. 2011;78:555–560. Fig. 3, p. 557.)

TREATMENT

Optimal treatment of skeletal infections requires collaborative
efforts of pediatricians, orthopedic surgeons, and interventional
radiologists. Obtaining a blood culture before antibiotics are given
is essential. Most patients with osteomyelitis have an indolent, non–
life-­threatening condition, and in these circumstances antibiotics
may be deferred until a decision about whether to obtain additional
diagnostic cultures (periosteal abscess, bone) has been made. A
short duration of antibiotic pretreatment (<48 hours) for osteomyelitis caused by S. aureus has minimal impact on culture yield from
abscess or bone specimens. In critically ill patients, empirical antimicrobial therapy should be initiated without delay.

Antimicrobial Therapy

The initial empirical antimicrobial therapy is based on knowledge
of likely bacterial pathogens at various ages, the results of the Gram
stain of aspirated material, and additional considerations (Table
725.4). In neonates, an antistaphylococcal penicillin, such as nafcillin or oxacillin (100-200 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6hr IV), and a
broad-­
spectrum cephalosporin, such as cefepime (100-150 mg/
kg/24 hr divided q12hr IV), provide coverage for the methicillin-­
susceptible S. aureus (MSSA), group B streptococcus, and gram-­
negative bacilli. If methicillin-­resistant Staphylococcus (MRSA) is
suspected, clindamycin or vancomycin is substituted for nafcillin.
If the neonate is a premature infant or has a central vascular catheter, the possibility of nosocomial bacteria (gram-­negative enteric,
Pseudomonas, or S. aureus) or fungi (Candida spp.) should be considered. In older infants and children, the principal pathogens are
S. aureus, K. kingae, and group A streptococcus.
Cefazolin (100-150 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6hr IV) or nafcillin
(100-200 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6hr) is the agent of choice for parenteral treatment of osteomyelitis caused by MSSA and is the backbone of empirical treatment for acute hematogenous osteomyelitis.
A major factor influencing the selection of empirical therapy is the
rate of methicillin resistance among community S. aureus isolates.

In areas where the prevalence of CA-­MRSA is >10–20%, clindamycin (30-40 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6-8hr) or vancomycin (40-60 mg/
kg/24 hr divided q6-8hr IV) should be used as empirical treatment.
Clindamycin is often preferred over vancomycin when the rate of
clindamycin resistance is low among community S. aureus isolates
given the renal toxicity associated with vancomycin. Because β-­
lactams are superior to clindamycin and vancomycin for the treatment of MSSA, dual drug therapy in critically ill children should be
continued until the causative organism is identified and susceptibilities are known. Rapid molecular diagnostic tests that can accurately differentiate MRSA from MSSA within hours of blood culture
positivity can help to avoid prolonged exposure to multiple agents.
Clindamycin is the best studied alternative therapy for susceptible
isolates of MRSA and for MSSA when a β-­lactam cannot otherwise
be used.
Penicillin is first-­line therapy for treating osteomyelitis caused by
susceptible strains of S. pneumoniae and all group A streptococci.
Cefotaxime or ceftriaxone is recommended for pneumococcal isolates with resistance to penicillin and for most Salmonella spp.
Special situations dictate deviations from the usual empirical antibiotic selection. In patients with sickle cell disease with osteomyelitis,
gram-­negative enteric bacteria (Salmonella) are common pathogens,
as well as S. aureus, so a broad-­
spectrum cephalosporin such as
cefepime (150 mg/kg/24 hr q8hr IV) is used in addition to clindamycin
or vancomycin. Clindamycin is a useful alternative drug for patients
allergic to β-­lactam drugs. In addition to good antistaphylococcal
activity, clindamycin has broad activity against anaerobes and is useful for treating infections secondary to penetrating injuries or compound fractures. For immunocompromised patients, combination
therapy is usually initiated, such as with vancomycin and ceftazidime,
cefepime, or piperacillin-­tazobactam, with or without an aminoglycoside. K. kingae responds to β-­lactam antibiotics, including penicillin
and cephalosporins, but some isolates produce a β-­lactamase. Thus a
first-­generation cephalosporin (cefazolin) is a reasonable component
of empirical therapy in children younger than 4 years of age. Although

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4290 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 725.4  Antibiotic Choice and Duration of Therapy for Uncomplicated Pediatric Acute Hematogenous Osteomyelitis
Caused by Staphylococcus aureus*,†
PATHOGEN

PARENTERAL THERAPY

Staphylococcus aureus,
methicillin susceptible

S. aureus, methicillin
resistant, susceptible to
clindamycin

S. aureus, methicillin ­resistant,
resistant to clindamycin

DURATION‡

ORAL CONVALESCENT THERAPY

Preferred:§
Cefazolin
Semisynthetic penicillin,# e.g.,
oxacillin and nafcillin

Preferred: Cephalexin

3-4 weeks if uncomplicated

Alternatives:#
Clindamycin
Vancomycin
Ceftaroline

Alternative: Clindamycin

3-4 weeks if uncomplicated

Preferred: Clindamycin

Preferred: Clindamycin

3-4 weeks if uncomplicated

Alternatives:
Vancomycin
Daptomycin
Ceftaroline
Linezolid

Alternatives:¶
Linezolid

No data

Preferred: Vancomycin

Preferred: Linezolid

No data

Alternatives:
Daptomycin
Ceftaroline
Linezolid

Alternatives: Insufficient clinical data for
the treatment of AHO to recommend
other oral antibiotics with in vitro
activity against S. aureus

No data

*Uncomplicated AHO is defined as the presence of infection in a single site with rapid clinical response to antimicrobial therapy (i.e., resolution of fever and marked improvement in
clinical signs within 3-5 days), with no more than a single early surgical procedure required as source control for the infection. Complicated infections may require a longer duration
of treatment than uncomplicated infections, particularly if multiple surgeries are needed to establish source control.
†Not all antibiotics listed have been prospectively evaluated in clinical trials of acute bacterial osteomyelitis. Prospective studies to evaluate the effectiveness of a range of antibiotic
doses in various degrees of severity of uncomplicated and complicated osteomyelitis, with or without surgery, have not been performed, although retrospective data have been
reported for many antibiotics in the treatment of pediatric osteomyelitis.
‡The suggested duration of therapy should be based on clinical course (pace of resolution of fever and clinical signs and symptoms, noting the need for surgical intervention[s]
required, if any), supported by decline of inflammatory markers.
§Preferred and alternative agents are selected based on published data regarding in vitro activity, clinical efficacy, and safety. Agents are generally listed in order of preference.
#Many of the β-­lactamase-­stable penicillins cause significant phlebitis in peripheral veins with infusion; administration through a central venous catheter is preferred.
¶Alternative antibiotics that may display in vitro activity against S. aureus have not been evaluated prospectively in AHO. However, linezolid has been evaluated in prospective
controlled clinical trials for invasive methicillin-­resistant S. aureus nosocomial pneumonia in adults and is more likely to provide adequate therapy of invasive S. aureus AHO,
compared with trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole, which is not recommended for children with AHO by the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) Clinical Practice Guidelines
for Treatment of Methicillin-­Resistant Staphylococcus aureus Infections in Adults and Children.
AHO, Acute hematogenous osteomyelitis.
From Woods CR, Bradley JS, Chatterjee A, et al. Clinical practice guideline by the Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society of America: 2021 guideline on diagnosis and management of
acute hematogenous osteomyelitis in pediatrics. J Pediatric Infect Dis Soc. 2021;10(8):801–844. Table 4.

the efficacy of treating osteomyelitis caused by B. henselae is uncertain,
azithromycin plus rifampin may be considered.
When the pathogen is identified and antibiotic susceptibilities
are determined, appropriate adjustments should be made to use
the antibiotic with the narrowest spectrum, lowest adverse effect
profile, and most favorable host tolerance. If a pathogen is not identified and a patient’s condition is improving, therapy is continued
with the initially selected antibiotic or an agent with a comparable
spectrum of coverage. This selection is more complicated owing
to the presence of MRSA isolates in the community. If a pathogen
is not identified and a patient’s condition is not improving, repeat
aspiration or biopsy and the possibility of a noninfectious condition
should be considered.
Duration of antibiotic therapy is individualized depending on the
organism isolated and clinical course. Most acute cases of osteomyelitis, including those caused by S. aureus, can be treated with
antibiotics for 21-28 days provided that the patient shows prompt
resolution of signs and symptoms (within 5-7 days) and the CRP
has normalized; a total of 4-6 weeks of therapy may be required
for those with substantially slower resolution of symptoms or normalization of CRP. For group A streptococcus, S. pneumoniae, or

Haemophilus influenzae type b, treatment duration may be shorter.
A total of 7-10 postoperative days of treatment is adequate for
Pseudomonas osteochondritis from a foot puncture wound, when
curettage of infected tissue has been performed. Immunocompromised patients generally require prolonged courses of therapy, as do
patients with mycobacterial or fungal infection.
For typical cases, antimicrobial agents may be changed from intravenous to oral administration when a patient’s condition clearly has
improved, the child is afebrile, and bacteremia has resolved. Oral
cephalexin (75-100 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8hr) may be used for susceptible staphylococcal or streptococcal infections. Oral clindamycin (30-40 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6-8hr) can be used to complete
therapy for children with clindamycin-­susceptible CA-­MRSA or for
patients who are seriously allergic or cannot tolerate β-­lactam antibiotics. The oral regimen decreases the risk of complications related
to prolonged intravenous therapy, is more comfortable for patients,
and permits treatment outside the hospital if adherence to treatment can be ensured. Outpatient intravenous antibiotic therapy
via a central venous catheter can be used for completing therapy at
home for (1) patients unable or unwilling to take oral medication;
(2) patients with underlying medical conditions that make enteral

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 726 u Septic Arthritis 4291
drug absorption unreliable; (3) patients without comparable oral
antibiotic options (e.g., resistant bacteria, drug allergy); and (4)
patients with disseminated infection (e.g., endocarditis, pulmonary
septic emboli). Catheter-­related complications, including infection
or mechanical problems, can lead to readmission or emergency
department visits.
In children with venous thrombosis complicating osteomyelitis,
administration of anticoagulants under the supervision of a hematologist until the thrombus has resolved is a generally accepted practice,
although high-­quality evidence to support this practice is lacking; antibacterial therapy alone may be sufficient.

Surgical Therapy

When frank pus is obtained from subperiosteal or metaphyseal aspiration or is suspected based on MRI findings, a surgical drainage procedure is usually indicated. Surgical intervention is also often indicated
after a penetrating injury and when a retained foreign body is possible.
In selected cases, catheter drainage performed by an interventional
radiologist is adequate.
Treatment of chronic osteomyelitis consists of surgical removal
of sinus tracts and sequestrum, if present. Surgical implantation of
antibiotics is not generally recommended. Antimicrobial therapy,
typically administered orally, is continued for several months or
longer until clinical and radiographic findings suggest that healing has occurred. Normalization of CRP and ESR is expected in
successful treatment of chronic osteomyelitis but does not by itself
indicate clearance of the underlying infection. Many patients with
chronic osteomyelitis have a normal CRP and ESR even at the onset
of illness.

Physical Therapy

The major role of physical therapy is a preventive one. If a child is
allowed to lie in bed with an extremity in flexion, limitation of extension can develop within a few days. The affected extremity should be
kept in extension with sandbags, splints, or, if necessary, a temporary
cast. Casts are also indicated when there is a potential for pathologic
fracture. After 2-3 days, when pain is easing, passive range-­of-­motion
exercises are started and continued until the child resumes normal
activity. In neglected cases with flexion contractures, prolonged physical therapy is required.

Prognosis

When pus is drained and appropriate antibiotic therapy is given, the
improvement in signs and symptoms is rapid. Failure to improve or
worsening by 48-72 hours requires review of the appropriateness
of the antibiotic therapy, the need for surgical intervention, or the
accuracy of the diagnosis. Acute phase reactants may be useful as
monitors. In acute osteomyelitis, the serum CRP typically decreases
below 2 mg/dL within 7-10 days after starting treatment, whereas
the ESR typically rises for 5-7 days and then falls slowly, dropping
sharply after 10-14 days. Failure of CRP to follow the usual course
should raise concerns about the adequacy of therapy. Recurrence of
disease and development of chronic infection after treatment occur
in <10% of patients.
Because children are in a dynamic state of growth, sequelae of
skeletal infections might not become apparent for months or years;
therefore long-­term follow-­up is necessary, with close attention
to range of motion of joints and bone length. Although firm data
about the impact of delayed treatment on outcome are not available,
it appears that initiation of medical and surgical therapy within 1
week of onset of symptoms provides a better prognosis than delayed
treatment.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 726

Septic Arthritis
Samir S. Shah
Without early recognition and prompt institution of appropriate medical and surgical therapy, septic arthritis in infants and children has the
potential to damage the synovium, adjacent cartilage, and bone and
may cause permanent disability.

ETIOLOGY

Staphylococcus aureus (see Chapter 227.1) is the most common
cause of bacterial arthritis in all age groups. Methicillin-­resistant S.
aureus (MRSA) accounts for a high proportion (>25%) of community
S. aureus isolates in many areas of the United States and throughout
the world. Group A streptococcus (see Chapter 229) and Streptococcus pneumoniae (pneumococcus; see Chapter 228) historically cause
10–20%; S. pneumoniae is most likely in the first 2 years of life, but
its frequency has declined since the introduction of the pneumococcal
conjugate vaccines. Kingella kingae is recognized as a relatively common etiology with improved culture and polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) methods in children younger than 4 years (see Chapters 239 and
725). In sexually active adolescents, gonococcus (see Chapter 238) is
a common cause of septic arthritis and tenosynovitis, usually of small
joints or as a monoarticular infection of a large joint (knee). Neisseria meningitidis (see Chapter 237) can cause either a septic arthritis
that occurs in the first few days of illness or a reactive arthritis that is
typically seen several days after antibiotics have been initiated. Group
B streptococcus (see Chapter 230) is an important cause of septic
arthritis in neonates. Q fever and brucellosis should be considered in
endemic areas and with an exposure risk.
Fungal infections usually occur as part of multisystem disseminated disease; Candida arthritis can complicate systemic infection
in neonates with or without indwelling vascular catheters. Primary
viral infections of joints are rare, but arthritis accompanies many viral
(parvovirus, mumps, rubella live vaccines) syndromes, suggesting an
immune-­mediated pathogenesis.
A microbial etiology is confirmed in approximately 65% of cases of
septic arthritis. In addition, some cases treated as bacterial arthritis
are actually postinfectious (gastrointestinal or genitourinary) reactive
arthritis (see Chapter 198) rather than primary infection. Lyme disease produces an arthritis more like a rheumatologic disorder and not
typically suppurative.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Septic arthritis is more common in young children. Half of all cases
occur by 2 years of age, and 75% of all cases occur by 5 years of age.
Adolescents and neonates are at risk of gonococcal septic arthritis.
Most infections in otherwise healthy children arise hematogenously.
Less commonly, infection of joints can follow penetrating injuries
or procedures such as trauma, arthroscopy, prosthetic joint surgery,
intraarticular steroid injection, and orthopedic surgery. Immunocompromised patients and those with rheumatologic joint disease are also
at increased risk of joint infection.

PATHOGENESIS

Septic arthritis primarily occurs as a result of hematogenous seeding
of the synovial space. Less often, organisms enter the joint space by
direct inoculation or extension from a contiguous focus. The synovial membrane has a rich vascular supply and lacks a basement membrane, providing an ideal environment for hematogenous seeding. The
presence of bacterial products (endotoxin or other toxins) within the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4292 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
joint space stimulates cytokine production (tumor necrosis factor-­α,
interleukin-1) within the joint, triggering an inflammatory cascade.
The cytokines stimulate chemotaxis of neutrophils into the joint space,
where proteolytic enzymes and elastases are released by neutrophils,
damaging the cartilage. Proteolytic enzymes released from the synovial cells and chondrocytes also contribute to destruction of cartilage
and synovium. Bacterial hyaluronidase breaks down the hyaluronic
acid in the synovial fluid, making the fluid less viscous and diminishing its ability to lubricate and protect the joint cartilage. Damage
to the cartilage can occur through increased friction, especially for
weight-­bearing joints. The increased pressure within the joint space
from accumulation of purulent material can compromise the vascular
supply and induce pressure necrosis of the cartilage. Synovial and cartilage destruction results from a combination of proteolytic enzymes
and mechanical factors.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Most septic arthritides are monoarticular. The signs and symptoms of
septic arthritis depend on the age of the patient. Early signs and symptoms may be subtle, particularly in neonates. As with osteomyelitis,
neonates might exhibit pseudoparalysis or pain that limits voluntary movement of the affected extremity (e.g., diaper changes). Septic
arthritis in neonates and young infants is often associated with adjacent osteomyelitis caused by transphyseal spread of infection, although
osteomyelitis contiguous with an infected joint can be seen at any age
(see Chapter 725).
Older infants and children might have fever and pain, with localizing signs such as swelling, erythema, and warmth of the affected joint.
With involvement of joints of the pelvis and lower extremities, limp or
refusal to walk often occurs.
Erythema and edema of the skin and soft tissue overlying the site
of infection are seen earlier in septic arthritis than in osteomyelitis
because the bulging infected synovium is usually more superficial,
whereas the metaphysis is located more deeply. Septic arthritis of
the hip is an exception because of the deep location of the hip joint.
With Lyme arthritis, joint swelling is typically quite prominent and
may be disproportionate to the relatively lesser degree of pain and
limited range of motion when compared with suppurative arthritis.
Lyme arthritis has a predilection for large joints, particularly the
knees and hips, and may be either monoarticular or pauciarticular
at presentation.
Joints of the lower extremity constitute 75% of all cases of septic arthritis (Table 726.1). The elbow, wrist, and shoulder joints are
involved in approximately 25% of cases, and small joints are uncommonly infected, except in gonococcal arthritis. Suppurative infections
of the hip, shoulder, elbow, and ankle in infants and children may be
associated with an adjacent osteomyelitis of the proximal femur, proximal humerus, proximal radius, and distal tibia because the metaphysis
extends intraarticularly. Concomitant osteomyelitis is less common

Table 726.1  Distribution of Hematogenous Bacterial
Arthritis*
BONE

PERCENT (%)

Knee

∼35

Hip

∼25

Ankle

∼10

Elbow

∼10

Wrist

∼4

Shoulder

∼5

Small joints

∼1–2

*Excludes Lyme disease and immune-­complex postinfectious arthritis. Viral (rubella,
mumps, chikungunya) infectious arthritis is often small and multiple joints. Septic
bursitis (shoulder, prepatellar) may be confused with bacterial joint infections.

in older children and adolescents as their anatomy and physiology
become more adult-­like.

DIAGNOSIS

The white blood cell count (WBC) and differential, ESR, and CRP are
generally elevated in children with joint infections, but elevations are
nonspecific and might not be helpful in distinguishing between infection and other inflammatory processes. Most children with septic
arthritis will have normal leukocyte counts and ESR at presentation,
and normal test results do not preclude the diagnosis of septic arthritis.
A CBC, however, may assist with assessment of illness severity (e.g.,
anemia, thrombocytopenia) or with identification of other causes of
the patient’s symptoms (e.g., leukemia).
Blood cultures should be performed in all cases of suspected septic
arthritis but are positive in ∼20% of proven or probable septic arthritis. Cervical, anal, and throat cultures should be obtained when gonococcus is suspected. Aspiration of the joint fluid provides the optimal
specimen to confirm the diagnosis. Most large joint spaces are easy to
aspirate, but the hip can pose technical problems; ultrasound guidance
facilitates aspiration. Although yield for joint aspirate cultures is higher
than from blood cultures, the overall culture yield when combining
both methods remains less than 50%. Multiplex bacterial PCR panels
have a yield around 50% from joint fluid specimens, but this increase
over culture is almost entirely because of their enhanced ability to detect
K. kingae. Other strategies to increase detection of K. kingae include
prompt inoculation onto solid media and inoculation of the joint fluid
in blood culture bottles. A diagnosis of Lyme arthritis is made via a
two-­step test of an ELISA or IFA followed by a reflex Western blot for
samples that are positive or equivocal by the first methodology. Patients
with Lyme arthritis are seropositive because arthritis is a late manifestation of infection. PCR is rarely necessary but can detect Borrelia burgdorferi in joint aspirate specimens in cases of Lyme arthritis.
Synovial fluid analysis for cell count, differential, protein, and
glucose has limited utility in diagnosing infectious arthritis. Joint
fluid WBC counts >50,000 cells/mm3 (often >100,000 cells/mm3)
suggest bacterial infection as the most likely etiology, but this finding is neither sensitive nor specific enough to exclude or confirm
a bacterial infection in isolation. When the results of joint aspirate cell counts and culture are not strongly suggestive of a joint
infection, but the clinical presentation is worrisome for a bacterial
etiology, infectious causes of sympathetic joint effusions such as
adjacent pyomyositis and osteomyelitis should be investigated by
MRI (see Chapter 725).
Monitoring elevated CRP may be of value in assessing response to
therapy or identifying complications. In addition, patients with adjacent infections complicating septic arthritis more frequently have a
CRP >10-13 mg/dL compared with patients with septic arthritis alone.
Other findings such as older age, prolonged symptoms, bacteremia,
alterations in other lab values (such as elevated absolute neutrophil
count or thrombocytopenia), and failure to rapidly improve with
therapy have been less consistently associated with adjacent infection.
Nonetheless, adjacent infection should be considered in patients demonstrating multiple risk factors.

Radiographic Evaluation

Radiographic studies play a crucial role in evaluating septic arthritis.
Conventional radiographs and ultrasonography are performed as part
of the routine workup. CT, MRI, and radionuclide studies can all contribute to establishing the diagnosis in selected cases (Fig. 726.1).

Plain Radiographs

Plain films can suggest the diagnosis of septic arthritis by showing widening of the joint capsule, soft tissue edema, and obliteration of normal
fat lines. Plain films can also help to exclude other causes of joint pain
such as fractures. Plain films of the hip can show medial displacement
of the obturator muscle into the pelvis (the obturator sign), lateral displacement or obliteration of the gluteal fat lines, and elevation of Shenton’s line with a widened arc.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 726 u Septic Arthritis 4293
genital) and parasitic infections, streptococcal pharyngitis, or viral
hepatitis can resemble acute septic arthritis (see Chapter 198).

TREATMENT

Optimal treatment of septic arthritis requires coordination between
primary care physicians, orthopedic surgeons, and radiologists.

Surgical Therapy

Hip effusion Tracking soft-tissue
abscess

Fig. 726.1 MRI of staphylococcal septic arthritis of left hip, with fluid

collections between planes of gluteal muscles. Arrows indicate fluid collection. (From Matthews CJ, Weston VC, Jones A, et al. Bacterial septic
arthritis in adults. Lancet. 2010;375:846–854.)

Ultrasonography

Ultrasonography is included with plain films in routine evaluations
because it is particularly helpful in detecting joint effusion and fluid
collection in the soft tissue and subperiosteal regions. Ultrasonography
is highly sensitive in detecting joint effusion, particularly for the hip
joint, where plain radiographs are normal in more than 50% of cases
of septic arthritis of the hip. Ultrasonography can serve as an aid in
performing hip aspiration.

Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Computed
Tomography

MRI and CT can confirm the presence of joint fluid in patients with
suspected osteoarthritis infections but are not routinely indicated. MRI
is useful in evaluating for adjacent osteomyelitis or pyomyositis but is
typically reserved for cases when the index of suspicion for these conditions is high. Considerations include patient factors such as younger
age, the clinical presentation (e.g., protracted pain preceding joint
swelling), the results of laboratory investigations such as joint aspiration and CRP, and response to therapy.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis of septic arthritis depends on the joint
or joints involved and the age of the patient. For the hip, transient
synovitis, pyomyositis, Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease, slipped capital
femoral epiphysis, psoas abscess, and proximal femoral, pelvic, or
vertebral osteomyelitis, as well as diskitis, should be considered.
Transient synovitis (toxic synovitis) is a postinfectious arthritis of
the hip that is often seen in young children after a viral infection
(see Chapter 719.2). For the knee, distal femoral or proximal tibial
osteomyelitis, pauciarticular rheumatoid arthritis, and referred
pain from the hip should be considered. Knee or thigh pain may
be referred from the hip. Other conditions such as trauma, cellulitis, pyomyositis, sickle cell disease, hemophilia, Lyme arthritis,
leukemia, serum sickness, and IgA vasculitis (Henoch-­S chönlein
purpura) can mimic purulent arthritis. When several joints are
involved, serum sickness, collagen vascular disease, rheumatic
fever, and IgA vasculitis should be considered. Arthritis is one of
the extraintestinal manifestations of inflammatory bowel disease.
Reactive arthritis after a variety of bacterial (gastrointestinal or

Drainage and irrigation of the infected joint via arthroscopy or
arthrotomy is typically performed to decompress the joint and
remove inflammatory debris. The decision to proceed to one of these
procedures after arthrocentesis is based on the gross appearance of
the joint fluid, or joint fluid WBC and differential, in the context of
the clinical presentation and the specific joint that is infected. Infection of the hip is generally considered a surgical emergency because
of the vulnerability of the blood supply to the head of the femur. For
joints other than the hip, daily aspirations of synovial fluid may be
required. In general, one or two subsequent aspirations suffice. If fluid
continues to accumulate after 4-5 days, arthrotomy or video-­assisted
arthroscopy is needed. At the time of surgery, the joint is flushed with
sterile saline solution. Antibiotics are not instilled because they are
irritating to synovial tissue, and adequate amounts of antibiotic are
achieved in joint fluid with systemic administration.

Antimicrobial Therapy

Empiric antimicrobial therapy should be started immediately in a child
with presumed septic arthritis who is ill-­appearing or has a rapidly
progressive infection. Antibiotic therapy may be deferred until initial
joint aspirate has been collected for diagnostic purposes in a child with
presumed septic arthritis who does not appear clinically ill.
The initial empirical antimicrobial therapy is based on likely bacterial pathogens at various ages, the results of the Gram stain of aspirated
material, and additional considerations. In neonates, an antistaphylococcal penicillin, such as nafcillin or oxacillin (100-200 mg/kg/24 hr divided
q6hr IV), and a broad-­spectrum cephalosporin, such as cefepime (100150 mg/kg/24 hr divided q12hr IV), provide coverage for the S. aureus,
group B streptococcus, and gram-­negative bacilli. If MRSA is a concern,
clindamycin or vancomycin is selected instead of nafcillin or oxacillin. If
the neonate is a small premature infant or has a central vascular catheter,
the possibility of nosocomial bacteria (S. aureus, gram-­negative enterics,
or Pseudomonas aeruginosa) or fungi (Candida) should be considered.
In children with septic arthritis, empirical therapy to cover for
S. aureus and streptococci includes at minimum nafcillin (100200 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6hr). In preschool-­age children (i.e., 6
months to 4 years), empiric therapy should include an antibiotic
with activity against Kingella kingae as well as S. aureus, such as
cefazolin (100-150 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8hr).
In areas where methicillin resistance is noted in ≥10–15% of community-­
acquired methicillin-­resistant S. aureus (CA-­MRSA) strains, adding an
antimicrobial that is effective against local CA-­MRSA isolates is suggested. Vancomycin (15 mg/kg q6hr IV) is preferred in patients who are
ill-­appearing, suspected to be bacteremic, or if local clindamycin resistance
is more than 10–15%. Clindamycin (30-40 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6-8hr) is
a good alternative when treating CA-­MRSA infections. For immunocompromised patients, combination therapy is usually initiated, such as with
vancomycin and ceftazidime, cefepime, or piperacillin/tazobactam, with
or without an aminoglycoside. Adjunct therapy with dexamethasone has
been shown in some studies to decrease the duration of fever and promote
a more rapid decline in inflammatory markers, but this is not yet part of
routine care. Lyme arthritis is treated with oral doxycycline (4.4 mg/kg/24
hr divided q12hr) for 28 days in children >8 years old. For children <8
years old, oral amoxicillin (50 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8hr) or cefuroxime
(30 mg/kg/24 hr divided q12hr) is recommended. A second 28-­day course
may be considered for patients with persistent or recurrent symptoms after
completing the initial course of treatment. Intravenous ceftriaxone (50
mg/kg q24hr IV) for 14-28 days may be considered as an initial or second
course of therapy for severe or refractory cases.
Empirical antimicrobials are narrowed to targeted therapy when the
pathogen is identified. If a pathogen is not identified and a patient’s condition is improving, therapy is continued with the antibiotic selected

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4294 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
initially. If a pathogen is not identified and a patient’s condition is not
improving, consideration should be given to the need for repeat aspiration, the presence of an extraarticular infection requiring surgical
debridement, or the possibility of a noninfectious etiology. In such cases,
MRI may be performed to assist with subsequent management decisions.
Duration of antibiotic therapy is individualized depending on the
organism isolated and the clinical course. A total of 10-14 days is usually adequate for streptococci, S. pneumoniae, and K. kingae; longer
therapy may be needed for S. aureus and gram-­negative infections (3
weeks), concomitant osteomyelitis (4 weeks), extensive disease, or slow
response to treatment. Normalization of CRP in addition to a normal
examination supports discontinuing antibiotic therapy. The prognostic significance of an improved but still minimally elevated ESR in the
third or fourth week of therapy is not clear if all other clinical and laboratory parameters are favorable. In selected patients, obtaining a plain
radiograph of the joint before completing therapy can provide evidence
(typically periosteal new bone) of a previously unappreciated contiguous site of osteomyelitis that would likely prolong antibiotic treatment.
Oral antibiotics can be used to complete therapy once the patient is
afebrile for 48-72 hours and is clearly improving.
Surgically administered intraarticular antibiotics are not
recommended.

PROGNOSIS

Improvement in signs and symptoms occurs rapidly after joint
drainage and antibiotic administration. Failure to improve or worsening by 48-72 hours requires review of the appropriateness of the
antibiotic therapy, the need for surgical intervention, and the correctness of the diagnosis. CRP may be useful to monitor response
to therapy. Failure of CRP to decline should raise concerns about
the adequacy of therapy. Recurrence of disease and development of
chronic infection after treatment occur in <10% of patients.
Septic arthritis can lead to numerous long-­term sequelae in children, including leg-­length discrepancy or angular deformity from
growth arrest, limitations in range of motion due to chondral damage, and avascular necrosis of the femoral head from septic arthritis
of the hip. The overall rate of these sequelae with current therapies
is <5%. However, children are in a dynamic state of growth, so these
abnormalities might not become apparent for months or years;
therefore long-­term follow-­up is necessary, with close attention to
range of motion of joints and bone length. Involvement of the hip is
associated with a higher rate of sequelae. Initiation of medical and
surgical therapy within 1 week of onset of symptoms provides a better prognosis than delayed treatment.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Section 2

Sports Medicine
Chapter 727

Prevention of Injuries
Gregory L. Landry and Andrew M. Watson
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the American College of Sports Medicine, and the American Academy of Pediatrics all
recommend daily moderate to vigorous physical activity for all adolescents. Physical activity has favorable effects on blood pressure, body
composition, and serum lipid levels in youths and is associated with
lower rates of cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes mellitus, osteoporosis, and colon and breast cancer among adults.

Pediatricians should promote physical activity to their patients,
especially those with lower rates of physical activity and sports participation, including children with special healthcare needs (see Chapter
756) and those from lower socioeconomic groups. Physicians also have
the responsibility of providing medical clearance for participation in
physical activity and sports as well as for the diagnosis and rehabilitation of injuries.
Approximately 30 million children and adolescents participate in
organized sports in the United States. Around 3 million sport-­related
injuries occur annually in young athletes, if injury is defined as time lost
from the sport. Deaths in sports are rare, with the majority of nontraumatic deaths caused by cardiac diseases (see Chapter 485). Nonetheless,
approximately 30% of life-­threatening injuries in children presenting to
an emergency room are sports related. Overall, injury rates and injury
severity in sports increase with age and pubertal development, related to
the greater speed, strength, and intensity of competition.
Identifying mechanisms of injury and establishing and enforcing
rules that reduce the likelihood of that mechanism of injury, including
penalizing dangerous play, have reduced catastrophic injury rates. Injury
rates also have been reduced by removing environmental hazards, such
as trampolines in gymnastics and stationary (versus breakaway) bases
in softball, and by modifying heat injury rates in soccer tournaments
by adding water breaks and reducing the playing time. Certain types
of equipment can mitigate the risk of some injuries, such as the use of
mouth guards to reduce dental injuries. The most consistently identified
risk factor for injury is prior injury. In other words, although reinjury
may often be due to insufficient recovery and rehabilitation of a prior
injury, appropriate rehabilitation reduces injury risk. Preseason training
for adolescent athletes, with an emphasis on speed, agility, core strength,
landing mechanics, and flexibility, is associated with lower injury rates
in soccer and fewer serious knee injuries in female athletes. Traditional
stretching maneuvers or massage have not been demonstrated to reduce
the risk of injury or muscle soreness, but ankle taping and use of lace­up ankle braces are helpful in preventing ankle injuries. One setting
for implementing some of these prevention strategies and for detecting
unrehabilitated injuries and medical problems that could affect participation in sports is the preparticipation sports examination (PSE).

PREPARTICIPATION SPORTS EXAMINATION

The PSE is performed with a directed history and physical examination,
including a screening musculoskeletal examination (see Table 485.2 in
Chapter 485). It identifies possible problems in 1–8% of athletes and
excludes fewer than 1% from participation. The PSE is not a substitute
for the recommended comprehensive annual evaluation, which looks
at behaviors that are potentially harmful to teens, such as sexual activity, drug use, and violence, and assesses for depression and suicidal ideation and addresses broader issues of prevention. Table 727.1 identifies
the purposes of the PSE. If possible, the PSE should be combined with
the comprehensive annual health visit with an emphasis on preventive
healthcare (see Chapters 13 and 28).
State requirements for how often a young athlete needs a PSE differ,
ranging from annually to entry to a new school level (middle school,
high school, college). At a minimum, a focused, annual interim evaluation should be done on an otherwise healthy young athlete. The PSE is
optimally performed 3-6 weeks before the start of practice.

History and Physical Examination

The essential components of the PSE are the history and focused medical and musculoskeletal screening examinations. Identified problems
require more investigation (Table 727.2). While many medical conditions should not limit sports participation, many specialty organizations have released recommendations regarding sports participation
(Table 727.3). In the absence of symptoms, no screening laboratory
tests are required. Return to sports after COVID-19 infection is based
on the severity of infection (mild, moderate, or ICU admission and/or
MIS-­C), and the intensity of follow-­up, especially for those with active
cardiac involvement during the acute phase of the illness (Fig. 727.1).
Seventy-­five percent of significant findings are identified by the history;
a standardized questionnaire given to the parent and athlete is important

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 727 u Prevention of Injuries

4295

Table 727.1  Objectives of the Preparticipation Sports
Examination

Table 727.3  Sports Participation Recommendations by
Condition

• Determination of the general health of the athlete
• Disclosure of defects that may limit participation
• Detection of conditions that may predispose the athlete to injury
• Determination of optimal level of performance
• Classification of the athlete according to individual qualifications
• Fulfillment of legal and insurance requirements for organized
athletic programs
• Evaluation of size and level of maturation of younger athletes
• Improvement of fitness and performance
• Provision of opportunities for students to compete who have
either physiologic or pathologic health conditions that may
preclude blanket approval
• Provision of the opportunity to counsel youths and answer health
and personal questions
• Entry of the athlete into the local sports medicine system,
establishing a doctor-­patient relationship that continues

CONDITION

From Sanders B, Blackburn TA, Boucher B. Preparticipation screening-­the sports
physical therapy perspective. Int J Sports Phys Ther. 2013;8(2):180–193. Table 1.

Restrict contact or collision
sports until evaluation by
a hematologist who can
assess degree of hemostatic
abnormality and the sport-­
specific risk

Sickle cell disease

Individual decision-­making
given variation in phenotypic
expression

Diabetes mellitus

No restrictions

Skin infections (herpes
gladiatorum, tinea
gladiatorum, impetigo,
molluscum contagiosum, warts,
and MRSA)

Prevent transmission by:
• Covering infected site
• Using prophylactic
medications as prescribed
• No sharing of personal
items
• Thorough cleaning of
equipment

Mononucleosis infection

Light, noncontact activity may
be introduced as tolerated 3
weeks after illness onset with
avoidance of contact/collision
sports until 4 weeks after illness
onset

Blood-­borne infections (hepatitis
B, hepatitis C, HIV)

No restrictions

COVID-19 infection

See Fig. 727.1

Heat illness, history of

Gradual acclimatization to
heat over 7-14 days, avoid
participation while ill (fever, skin
rash, viral symptoms), ensure
free access to fluids at all times,
consume sodium-­containing
food/fluids to replace
insensible losses, rest periods
of at least 3 hours before
practice or games

Down syndrome

Individual decision-making
based on the presence of
congenital heart disease or
atlantoaxial instability

Table 727.2  Preparticipation Sports Examination
COMPONENT OF THE
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

CONDITION TO BE DETECTED

Vital signs

Hypertension, cardiac disease,
bradycardia or tachycardia

Height and weight

Obesity, eating disorders,
malabsorption

Vision and pupil size

Legal blindness, absent eye,
anisocoria, amblyopia

Lymph node

Infectious diseases, malignancy

Cardiac (performed standing
and supine)

Heart murmur, prior surgery,
dysrhythmia, femoral pulses

Pulmonary

Recurrent and exercise-­induced
bronchospasm, chronic lung
disease

Abdomen

Organomegaly, abdominal mass

Skin

Contagious diseases (impetigo,
herpes, staphylococcal,
streptococcal)

Genitourinary

Varicocele, undescended testes,
tumor, hernia

Musculoskeletal

Acute and chronic injuries, physical
anomalies (scoliosis)

because the young athlete might not know or might forget important
aspects of the history. The questionnaire should include questions about
the family history and the patient’s previous medical, surgical, cardiac, pulmonary, neurologic, dermatologic, visual, psychologic, musculoskeletal,
and endocrinologic problems, as well as about prior heat illness, medications, allergies, immunizations, and diet. The most commonly identified
problems are unrehabilitated injuries. An investigation of previous injuries, including diagnostic tests, treatment, and present functional status,
is indicated.
Sudden death during sports can result from undetected cardiac disease, such as hypertrophic or other cardiomyopathies (see Chapter 488),
anomalous coronary vessels (see Chapter 481.2), or a ruptured aorta
in Marfan syndrome (see Chapter 743). In many cases, the underlying
heart disease is not suspected, and death is the first sign of underlying
heart disease (see Chapter 485). However, in approximately 25–50% of
cases, preceding symptoms of dizziness, chest pain, syncope, palpitations,
shortness of breath, and/or a family history of early, unexpected death are
identified retrospectively. Chest radiographs, electrocardiograms, and

RECOMMENDATION

Hemophilia

Data from Herman D, Gadi N, Peck E. Team medical coverage. In Miller MD, Thompson
SR, eds. DeLee, Drez, & Miller’s Sports Medicine, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2020.

echocardiograms are not recommended as routine screening tests in the
United States, but screening electrocardiograms are recommended in a
number of other countries and are becoming more commonly used among
higher risk groups in the United States, such as collegiate and professional
athletes. If there is a suspicion of heart disease, such as a history of syncope,
presyncope, palpitations, or excessive dyspnea with exercise, or a family
history of a condition such as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or prolonged
QT or Marfan syndrome, the evaluation should be complete and include
a 12-­lead electrocardiogram, an echocardiogram, Holter or event-­capture
monitoring, and a stress test with electrocardiographic monitoring. Recommendations for participation with identified cardiac disease should be
made in consultation with a cardiologist.
Sports may also be classified by intensity (Fig. 727.2) and contact (Table
727.4). Athletes may seek to participate in sports against medical advice
and have done so successfully for professional sports. Section 504(a) of
the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 prohibits discrimination against disabled
athletes if they have the capabilities or skills required to play a competitive
sport. This was reinforced through the Americans with Disabilities Act of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Significant symptoms
Systemic symptoms/signs,
cough, fever, muscle aches,
fatigue, shortness of breath,
fast heart rate

Rest from exercise; perform
activities of daily living only;
avoid unnecessary exertion

Monitor daily progress
of symptoms

Improvement/
resolution

Confirmation of acute
COVID-19 infection

Minimal or no symptoms
Asymptomatic or mild
symptoms only, mild sore
throat, mild runny nose,
no fever, normal pulse rate

Light exercise, at about 50%
intensity of normal pre-COVID
exercise routine, 15–30 mins
duration × 3 days*

Deteriorating symptoms#

No improvement
14 days* after
diagnosis

Moderate exercise, at about
75% intensity of normal
pre-COVID exercise routine,
30+ mins duration × 3 days*

Assessment by
medical practitioner

Resumption of normal
pre-COVID exercise routine

Monitor response to attempted exercise, looking for symptoms such as excessive fatigue.
lack of exercise tolerance. Only progress if responding normally to exercise stimulus
Cease exercise for
48 hours; rest; then retry
light exercise

Adverse response to
attempted exercise

Repeated adverse response
to attempted exercise
>30 days* after diagnosis

• Dry, post-viral cough may persist beyond the acute COVID-19 infection
• Individuals should be 10 days post diagnosis or onset of symptoms (or have negative RAT on days 6 & 7), before rejoining group / team activities
• *Number of days at each step may be modified in high performance sport, where athletes have the benefit of close medical supervision
• Those with medical comorbidities should adopt a more cautious approach to return to exercise
• # Cardiac symptoms should be treated as a medical emergency: Pressure, tightness, squeezing pain in chest, arms, neck, jaw, or back,
cold sweat, difficulty breathing, collapse, sudden dizziness

Fig. 727.1 Graduated return to exercise after COVID-19 infection. RAT, rapid home antigen test. (From Hughes DC, Orchard JW, Partridge EM,

II. Moderate (10-20%)
I. Low (<10%)

Increasing Static Component

III. High (>30%)

et al. Return to exercise post-COVID-19 infection: a pragmatic approach in mid-2022. J Sci Med Sport. 2022;25:544–547. Fig. 1.)

Bobsledding/Luge
Field events (throwing)
Gymnastics*†
Martial arts
Rock climbing
Sailing
Water skiing*†
Weight lifting*†
Windsurfing*†

Body building*†
Downhill skiing
Skateboarding*†
Snow boarding*†
Wrestling*

Boxing
Canoeing
Kayaking
Cycling*†
Decathlon
Rowing
Speed skating
Triathlon*†

Archery
Auto racing*†
Diving*†
Equestrian*†
Motorcycling*†

American football*
Field events (jumping)
Figure skating
Rodeoing*†
Rugby
Running (sprint)
Surfing
Synchronized swimming†
“Ultra” racing

Basketball*
Ice hockey*
Cross-country skiing
(skating technique)
Lacrosse*
Running (middle distance)
Swimming
Team handball
Tennis

Bowling
Cricket
Curling
Golf
Riflery
Yoga

Baseball/Softball
Fencing
Table tennis
Volleyball

Badminton
Cross-country skiing
(classic technique)
Field hockey*
Orienteering
Race walking
Racquetball/Squash
Running (long distance)
Soccer*

A. Low (<50%)

B. Moderate (50-75%)

C. High (>75%)

Increasing Dynamic Component

Fig. 727.2 Classification of sports. This classification is based on peak static and dynamic components achieved during competition; however,

higher values may be reached during training. The increasing dynamic component is defined in terms of the estimated percentage of maximal oxẏ 2max) achieved and results in an increasing cardiac output. The increasing static component is related to the estimated percentage
gen uptake (Vo
of maximal voluntary contraction reached and results in an increasing blood pressure load. The lowest total cardiovascular demands (cardiac output
and blood pressure) are shown in the palest color, with increasing dynamic load depicted by increasing blue intensity and increasing static load by
increasing red intensity. Note the graded transition between categories, which should be individualized on the basis of player position and style
of play. *Danger of bodily collision (see Table 727.4 for more detail on collision risk). †Increased risk if syncope occurs. (Modified from Mitchell JH,
Haskell W, Snell P, et al. 36th Bethesda conference. Task force 8: classification of sports. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;45:1364–1367.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 728 u Management of Musculoskeletal Injury
Table 727.4  Sports According to Risk of Impact and
Educational Background
JUNIOR HIGH
SCHOOL

HIGH SCHOOL/COLLEGE

Impact
expected

American football
Ice hockey
Lacrosse
Wrestling
Karate/judo
Fencing
Boxing

American football
Soccer
Ice hockey
Lacrosse
Basketball
Wrestling
Karate/judo
Downhill skiing
Squash
Fencing
Boxing

Impact may
occur

Soccer
Basketball
Field hockey
Downhill skiing
Equestrian
Squash
Cycling

Field hockey
Equestrian
Cycling
Baseball/softball
Gymnastics
Figure skating

Baseball/softball
Cricket
Golf
Riflery
Gymnastics
Volleyball
Swimming
Track and field
Tennis
Figure skating
Cross-­country skiing
Rowing
Sailing
Archery
Weightlifting
Badminton

Cricket
Golf
Riflery
Volleyball
Swimming
Track and field
Tennis
Cross-­country skiing
Rowing
Sailing
Archery
Weightlifting
Badminton

Impact not
expected

From Levine BD, Baggish AL, Kovacs RJ, et al. Eligibility and disqualification
recommendations for competitive athletes with cardiovascular abnormalities: Task force
1: classification of sports: dynamic, static, and impact: a scientific statement from the
American Heart Association and American College of Cardiology. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2015;66(21):2350–2355.

1990. Participation in competitive sports is considered a privilege, not a
right. Knapp v Northwestern University established that “difficult medical
decisions involving complex medical problems can be made by responsible physicians exercising prudent judgment (which will be necessarily
conservative when definitive scientific evidence is lacking or conflicting)
and relying on the recommendations of specialist consultants or guidelines
established by a panel of experts.”
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 728

Management of
Musculoskeletal Injury
Gregory L. Landry and Andrew M. Watson
MECHANISM OF INJURY
Acute Injuries

Sprains, strains, and contusions account for the majority of musculoskeletal injuries. A sprain is an injury to a ligament or joint capsule. Most

4297

sprains are graded I-­III. A grade I sprain is defined as mild damage to
a ligament or ligaments without instability of the affected joint. A grade
II sprain is considered a partial tear to the ligament, such that it exhibits excessive laxity but has a firm endpoint on examination. A grade III
sprain is a complete tear of the ligament with instability to the affected
joint and without a firm endpoint on examination. A strain is an injury
to a muscle or tendon, and these are also graded I-­III. Grade I muscle
strains involve disruption of only a few muscle fibers, pain is mild to
moderate, and range of motion and strength are at or near normal. Grade
II strains represent a more significant, partial tear of the muscle and frequently involve loss of range of motion and strength. Grade III strains are
defined as complete rupture of the musculotendinous unit. On examination, grade III strains, and often grade II strains, present with ecchymosis
and a palpable step-­off at the site of injury. A contusion is a crush injury
to any soft tissue. The history of the injury is especially helpful in assessing musculoskeletal trauma. More severe injuries, including fractures
or internal derangement of a joint, may have acute signs and symptoms
such as immediate swelling, deformity, numbness or “give-­way” weakness, a loud painful pop, mechanical locking of the joint, or instability.

Overuse Injuries

Overuse injuries are caused by repetitive microtrauma that exceeds the
body’s rate of repair. This can occur in muscles, tendons, bone, bursae,
cartilage, and nerves. Overuse injuries can occur in all sports but are
more commonly seen in sports emphasizing repetitive motion such as
swimming, running, tennis, baseball pitching, and gymnastics. Factors
leading to overuse injuries can be categorized as extrinsic (i.e., training errors, poor equipment, or workout surface) and intrinsic (i.e.,
athlete’s anatomy or medical conditions). Training error is the most
commonly identified factor. For example, at the beginning of the training program, athletes might violate the “10% rule” by increasing the
duration or intensity of workouts by more than 10% per week. This
may exceed the body’s capacity to recover between bouts of activity,
leading to accumulated microtrauma that manifests as an overuse
injury. Intrinsic factors include abnormal biomechanics that may be
due to underlying anatomic causes (e.g., leg-­length discrepancy, pes
planus, pes cavus, tarsal coalition, valgus heel, external tibial torsion,
and femoral anteversion), muscle imbalance, inflexibility, and medical conditions (deconditioning, nutritional deficits, amenorrhea, and
obesity). To identify the cause of an overuse injury, the athlete should
be questioned about the specifics of their training. Specifically, runners, for example, should be asked about their shoes, orthotics, running surface, weekly mileage or time spent running per week, speed or
hill workouts, and previous injuries and rehabilitation. When causative
factors are identified, they can be modified or eliminated so that after
rehabilitation the athlete does not suffer a recurrent overuse injury.
For athletes engaged in excessive training that causes an overuse
injury, curtailing all exercise may not be necessary. Treatment incorporates a reduction of training load (relative rest) combined with a rehabilitation program designed to return athletes to their sport as soon
as possible while minimizing risk of re-­injury. Early identification of
an overuse injury requires less alteration of the workout regimen. In
addition, proper sleep, nutrition, and stress management can optimize
recovery between bouts of activity, promoting physiologic adaptation
and reducing the risk of accumulated damage that leads to injury.
It has become more commonplace for young athletes to specialize
in a single sport and engage in year-­round training. Families should
be advised about the risks of specialization in young athletes because
this is associated with burnout, decreased motivation and enjoyment,
and increased risk of overuse injuries. This is especially evident among
baseball pitchers, in whom repeated exposure to the highly repetitive
and forceful throwing motion can damage the tissues in the elbow and
shoulder in a growing athlete. These athletes and their parents should
be counseled to diversify their sport participation at younger ages,
which may increase their enjoyment and performance in sport, as well
as reduce the risk of overuse injury.
The goals of treatment in overuse injuries are to control pain and
spasm to rehabilitate flexibility, strength, endurance, and proprioceptive deficits (Table 728.1). In many overuse injuries, the role of inflammation in the process is minimal. For most injuries to tendons, the term

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4298 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 728.1  Staging of Overuse Injuries
GRADE

GRADING SYMPTOMS

TREATMENT

I

Pain only after activity
Does not interfere with performance or intensity
Generalized tenderness
Disappears before next session

Modification of activity, consider cross-­training, home rehabilitation
program

II

Minimal pain with activity
Does not interfere with performance
More localized tenderness
Disappears before next session

Modification of activity, cross-­training, home rehabilitation program

III

Pain interferes with activity and performance
Definite area of tenderness
Usually disappears between sessions

Significant modification of activity, strongly encourage cross-­
training, home rehabilitation program, and outpatient physical
therapy

IV

Pain with activities of daily living
Pain does not disappear between sessions
Marked interference with performance and training intensity

Discontinue activity temporarily, cross-­training only, oral analgesic,
home rehabilitation program, and intensive outpatient physical
therapy

V

Pain interferes with activities of daily living
Signs of tissue injury (e.g., edema)
Chronic or recurrent symptoms

Prolonged discontinuation of activity, cross-­training only, oral
analgesic, home rehabilitation program, and intensive outpatient
physical therapy

tendinitis is no longer used because there is little or no inflammation
on histopathology of the affected tendons. Rather, there is evidence of
microscopic trauma to the tissue and a disorientation of the tendon
fibers. Most of these entities are more appropriately called tendinosis;
when the tendon tissue is scarred and when markedly abnormal, tendinopathy. With tendinosis, there is less of a role for antiinflammatory
medication in the treatment, except as an analgesic.
Novel treatments are emerging for the effective treatment of chronic
tendinopathies. Under ultrasound guidance, pathologic areas of tendon tissue can be targeted with injections of autologous blood or
platelet-­rich plasma to stimulate a proinflammatory and more robust
healing response. Platelet-­rich plasma is a controversial therapy with
a mixed body of evidence related to its effectiveness for certain acute
and chronic tendinopathies; there is a lack of consensus regarding its
role in the standard of care. Pathologic tissue can also be targeted with
percutaneous needle fenestration or tenotomy, and tendon-­fat pad
adhesions can also be addressed through mechanical needle scraping
or hydrodissection techniques using ultrasound.

placed directly over the injury as tolerated for 20 minutes continuously
3 or 4 times per day until the swelling resolves. Compression limits
further bleeding and swelling but should not be so tight that it limits
perfusion. Elevation of the extremity promotes venous return and limits swelling. A nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug (NSAID) or acetaminophen are indicated for analgesia.
Pain-­free isometric strengthening and range of motion exercises
should be initiated as soon as tolerable. Pain inhibits full muscle contraction; deconditioning results if the pain and resultant disuse persist
for days to weeks, thus delaying recovery. Education about the nature
of the injury and the specifics of rehabilitation exercises, including
handouts with written instructions and drawings demonstrating the
exercises, are helpful.

INITIAL EVALUATION OF THE INJURED EXTREMITY

Initially, the examiner should determine the quality of the peripheral
pulses and capillary refill rate, as well as the gross motor and sensory
function to assess for neurovascular injury. The first priorities are to
maintain vascular integrity and skeletal stability.
Criteria for immediate attention and rapid orthopedic consultation
include vascular compromise, nerve compromise, and open fracture.
With the latter, the exposed wound should be covered with sterile saline-­
soaked gauze, the injured limb should be padded and splinted, and systemic antibiotics should be administered. Pressure should be applied to
any site of excessive bleeding. Additional criteria include deep laceration over a joint, unreducible dislocation, grade III (complete) tear of
a muscle-­tendon unit, and displaced, significantly angulated fractures.

TRANSITION FROM IMMEDIATE MANAGEMENT TO
RETURN TO PLAY

Rehabilitation of a musculoskeletal injury should be initiated on the
day of the injury.

Phase 1

Limit further injury, control swelling and pain, and minimize strength
and flexibility losses. PRICE principles (Protection, Rest, Ice, Compression, and Elevation) need to be applied. Crutches, air stirrups for
ankle sprains, slings for arm injuries, and elastic wraps (4-8 inches)
for compression are a helpful inventory of medical supplies. Ice can be

Phase 2

Improve strength and range of motion (e.g., flexibility) while allowing the
injured structures to heal. Protective devices are removed when the patient’s
strength and flexibility improve and activities of daily living are pain-­free.
Flexibility can then be addressed by a program of specific stretches, held for
15-30 seconds for three to five repetitions, once or twice daily. A physical
therapist or athletic trainer is invaluable in guiding the athlete through this
process. Protective devices might need to be used upon return to sports
participation. Swimming, water jogging, and stationary cycling are good,
low-­impact aerobic exercises that can allow the injured lower extremity to
be used pain-­free while maintaining cardiovascular fitness.

Phase 3

Achieve near-­normal strength and flexibility of the injured structures
and further improve or maintain cardiovascular fitness. Strength
and endurance are improved under controlled conditions using elastic bands and closed kinetic chain exercises (movement of multiple
joints and limb segments with foot fixed to a static surface, such as the
floor or wall) at this point and then progressing next to using exercise
equipment followed by free weights. Additional sensory proprioceptive
training allows the athlete to redevelop the kinesthetic sense critical to
joint function and stability during activity.

Phase 4

Return to exercise or competition without restriction. When the athlete has reached normal range of motion, strength, proprioception, and
endurance, the athlete can initiate sports-­specific exercises. The athlete
will transition from the rehabilitation program to functional rehabilitation appropriate for the sport. Substituting sports participation for rehabilitation is inappropriate; rather, there should be progressive stepwise

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 728 u Management of Musculoskeletal Injury
functional return to a full activity or play program. For instance, a basketball player recovering from an ankle injury might begin a walk-­run-­
sprint-­cut program before returning to competition. At any point in
this progression, if pain is experienced, the athlete needs to stop, apply
ice, avoid running for 1-2 days, continue to perform ankle stabilizing
exercises, and then resume running at a lower intensity and progress
accordingly.

Relative Rest and Return-­to-­Play Guidelines

Relative rest refers to the concept that the athlete participates in rehabilitation and return to sport activities provided the injured structures
do not hurt during or within 24 hours of the activity. Exercising beyond
the pain threshold delays recovery.

IMAGING

Traditional imaging modalities such as x-­ray, ultrasound, MRI, and CT
are well-­established in the routine diagnostic workup of musculoskeletal injury. An obvious advantage of ultrasound is a lack of radiation. It is
also better tolerated by younger children who may have difficulty complying with MRI or CT protocols. Dynamic movement or stressing of
a limb, joint, or structure can provide valuable diagnostic information
and can easily be compared to the contralateral side for comparison.
Snapping or popping sensations, suspected intramuscular hematomas,
stress fractures, and prognostic scrutiny of strains, sprains, and tendinopathies are all high-­yield applications of diagnostic musculoskeletal sonography. Ultrasound imaging can also increase the accuracy
of therapeutic injections, improving injection efficacy while simultaneously reducing adverse outcomes by erroneous needle placement.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES OF
MUSCULOSKELETAL PAIN

Traumatic, rheumatologic, infectious, hematologic, psychologic, congenital, and oncologic processes—especially under the age of 12 years
old —can result in a presenting complaint of musculoskeletal pain.
Symptoms such as fatigue, weight loss, rash, multiple joint complaints,
fever, chronic or recent illness, pain out of proportion to the nature of
the injury, and persistent pain despite conservative care suggest a diagnosis other than sports-­related trauma. The possibility of child abuse,
including sexual abuse, should not be overlooked. Incongruity between
the patient’s history and physical examination findings should lead to
further evaluation. A negative review of systems with an injury history
consistent with the physical findings suggests a sports-­related etiology.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

728.1 Growth Plate Injuries
Gregory L. Landry and Andrew M. Watson
Approximately 20% of pediatric sports injuries seen in the emergency department are fractures, and 25% of those fractures involve an
epiphyseal growth plate or physis (see Chapter 724). Growth in long
bones occurs in three areas and is susceptible to injury. Immature bone
can be acutely injured at the physis (e.g., Salter-­Harris fractures, see
Chapter 724.2), the articular surface (e.g., osteochondritis dissecans
[OCD]), or the apophysis (e.g., avulsion fractures). Males suffer nearly
twice as many physeal fractures as females, with the highest incidence
of fracture occurring during peak height velocity (females: age 12 ± 2.5
years; males: age 14 ± 2 years). The physis is a pressure growth plate and
is responsible for longitudinal growth in bone. The apophysis is a bony
outgrowth at the attachment of a tendon and is a traction physis. The
epiphysis is the end of a long bone, distal or proximal to the long bone,
and contains articular cartilage at the joint.
Physeal injuries of the upper extremity are most commonly seen at
the distal radius in the growing child or adolescent and are typically due
to excessive force applied to the upper extremity. Injuries of this nature
can be seen in athletes, including those participating in gymnastics,
cheerleading, ice skating, hockey, and weightlifting. Mechanisms of

4299

injury include falls onto an outstretched hand or repetitive dorsiflexion
and axial loading through the distal radius (see Chapter 734). Chronic
wrist pain can be seen in up to 79% of young gymnasts—particularly
female gymnasts between the ages of 12-14 years—and is commonly
termed gymnasts’ wrist (see Chapter 722). With repetitive axial loading, temporary metaphyseal ischemia may be induced, preventing cartilage calcification and causing the physis to widen. With widening of
the distal radial physis, microfractures can develop. Clinical features
include radial wrist pain (particularly dorsal) that is aggravated with
passive and active hyperextension activities and relieved with suspension of the offending activity. Tenderness or focal pain around the circumference of the distal radius is often noted. Differential diagnosis
includes metacarpal fractures, scaphoid fracture and, in the older child
or adolescent, de Quervain tenosynovitis. Juvenile idiopathic arthritis,
malignancy, and infection need to be considered in a child with a painful, swollen wrist without a history of trauma. X-­rays of the wrist can
be helpful, particularly when compared to the contralateral extremity.
Radiographs can show physeal widening with cystic changes involving
the metaphyseal segment, breaking of the distal epiphysis, and, in later
stages, positive ulnar variance (longer ulna compared to the radius).
MRI is often helpful for stress fractures when radiographs are inconclusive and will show signs of stress reaction (bone marrow edema,
periosteal reaction, etc.), even if a fracture line is not evident. PRICE
principles are followed with nonnarcotic pain management. Salter-­
Harris fractures types I and II can be treated with closed reduction and
immobilization. Ulnar-­shortening osteotomy may be necessary in the
athlete with significant ulnar positive variance. Physeal injuries at the
knee (distal femur, proximal tibia) are rare, whereas those at the ankle
(distal fibula most commonly) are more frequent—typically occurring
as a result of an inversion injury—and predominantly consist of Salter-­
Harris I fractures.
Growth disturbance following a growth plate injury is a function of
location of the physeal fracture. This influences the probability that a
physeal bar will form, resulting in growth arrest. In the upper extremity, the areas making the largest contribution to longitudinal growth are
the proximal humerus and distal radius and ulna; in the lower extremities, the distal femur and the proximal tibia and fibula are the greatest
contributors to longitudinal growth. Injuries to these areas are more
likely to cause growth disturbance compared with physeal injuries at
the other end of these long bones. The type of physis fracture relative to
the risk of growth disturbance is described by the Salter-­Harris classification system (see Table 724.1). A grade I injury is least likely to result
in growth disturbance, and grade V is the most likely fracture to result
in growth disturbance.
Osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) affects the subchondral bone
and overlying articular surface (see Chapter 718.3). With avascular necrosis of subchondral bone, the articular surface can flatten,
soften, or break off in fragments. The etiology may be related to
repetitive stress injury in some patients. OCD most commonly presents in the lower extremities at the knee, affecting the lateral aspect
of the medial femoral condyle in 70% of patients, the lateral femoral
condyle in 20%, and the patella in 10%. In the upper extremities,
it is most frequently seen at the elbow (Fig. 728.1)—affecting the
capitellum—and is often associated with repetitive overhead throwing or swinging activities (e.g., baseball). Other sites where OCD
lesions are seen are the ankle (talus) and radial head. OCD classically affects athletes in their second decade. The most common
presentation is poorly localized, vague joint pain. There is rarely a
history of recent acute trauma. Some OCD lesions are asymptomatic and incidental—diagnosed on “routine” radiographs—whereas
others manifest as joint effusion, pain, decreased range of motion,
and mechanical symptoms (e.g., locking, popping, or catching).
Activity usually worsens the pain.
Physical examination might show no specific findings. Sometimes
tenderness over the involved condyle can be elicited by deep palpation.
Diagnosis is usually made with plain radiographs. Treatment of OCD
includes both nonoperative and surgical management (Chapter 718.3).
Long-­term sequelae can be seen in up to 25% with atypical lesions,
older age, effusion, and lesions of large size.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4300 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

Fig. 728.2 Anterior inferior iliac spine avulsion. (Copyright Laurel
Sauer, 2017.)

Fig. 728.1 Osteochondritis dissecans in the elbow. (Copyright Laurel
Sauer, 2017.)

Avulsion fractures occur when a forceful muscle contraction dislodges the apophysis from the bone. They occur most commonly
around the hip (Fig. 728.2) and are typically treated nonsurgically if
no significant displacement of the avulsed fragment is present. Acute
fractures to other apophyses (i.e., knee and elbow) require urgent
orthopedic consultation. Chronically increased traction at the muscle-­
apophysis attachment can lead to repetitive microtrauma and pain at
the apophysis. The most common areas affected are the knee (Osgood-­
Schlatter and Sinding-­Larsen-­Johansson disease), the ankle (Sever
disease) (Fig. 728.3), the proximal fifth metatarsal (Iselin disease), and
the medial epicondyle (Little Leaguer’s elbow). Traction apophysitis
of the knee and ankle can often be treated in a primary care setting. The
main goal of treatment is to minimize the intensity and incidence of
pain and disability. Exercises that increase the strength, flexibility, and
endurance of the muscles attached at the apophysis, using the relative
rest principle, are appropriate. The use of a patellar strap can provide
benefit in reducing the traction force placed upon the tibial apophysis
during activity. Symptoms can last for 12-24 months if untreated. As
growth slows, symptoms abate.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

728.2 Shoulder Injuries
Gregory L. Landry and Andrew M. Watson
Shoulder pain associated with radiating symptoms down the arm
should raise the possibility of a neck injury (see Chapter 730). Neck
pain and tenderness or limitation of cervical range of motion requires
cervical spine immobilization and transfer of the athlete for further
evaluation. If there is no neck pain, tenderness, or limitation of motion
of the cervical spine, the shoulder is likely the site of the primary injury.

Fig. 728.3 Calcaneal apophysitis (Sever disease). (Copyright Laurel
Sauer, 2017.)

CLAVICLE FRACTURES

Clavicle fracture is one of the most common shoulder injuries (see
Chapter 724.3). Injury is usually sustained by a fall on the lateral
side of an adducted shoulder, on an outstretched hand, or by direct
blow. Approximately 80% of fractures occur in the middle third of the
clavicle. With younger children, plastic bowing of the clavicle may be
present instead of an overt fracture but should be treated in the same
fashion. Treatment is conservative and includes the use of an arm sling
or figure-­of-8 brace for comfort and protection. An arm sling is preferred because it is generally more comfortable and easier to apply with
similar clinical outcomes. Healing time is shorter in comparison to
that in adults—generally 3-6 weeks. An additional 2-­to 3-­week period
of protection from contact/collision activities is recommended after
clinical and radiographic healing is achieved to prevent re-injury. If
nondisplaced, most medial and lateral clavicular fractures can be managed similar to middle-­third clavicular fractures. Displaced lateral
and medial third fractures require orthopedic consultation because of
a higher incidence of acromioclavicular (AC) osteoarthritis (lateral),
and physeal involvement (medial). Distal clavicular osteolysis is likely
an overuse injury associated with slow dissolution and resorption of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 728 u Management of Musculoskeletal Injury
bone. The cause of injury is unclear, appearing most consistent with a
stress reaction or fracture at the site of considerable force. This lesion
is commonly seen in weightlifting athletes and can be seen in older
children. Nonoperative treatment, including activity limitations, ice,
NSAIDs, and cortisone injections, can be helpful. For weightlifters,
narrowing their hand spacing on the barbell and slowing descent phase
of the bench press to end 4-6 cm above the chest are recommended
activity modifications. For those not willing to modify weightlifting
activity or those with persistent symptoms despite conservative care,
surgery can be very successful and involves removal of the distal clavicle (approximately 1 cm) with no loss of strength and full return to
activity anticipated.

ACROMIOCLAVICULAR JOINT SEPARATION

An AC joint separation most commonly occurs when an athlete sustains a direct blow to the acromion with the humerus in an adducted
position, forcing the acromion inferiorly and medially. Force is
directed toward the AC joint and coracoclavicular ligaments because of
the inherent stability of the sternoclavicular joint. Patients have point
tenderness at the AC joint, pain with lifting their arms above the level
of their shoulder, and possibly an apparent step-­off between the distal
clavicle and the acromion (Fig. 728.4).
Type I AC joint injuries involve isolated sprain of the AC ligament with the periosteal sleeve intact (Fig. 728.5). There is no visible deformity, and the radiographs are normal. Pain is elicited with
adduction of the humerus across the chest and palpation of the AC
joint. Type II injuries involve disruption of the AC and coracoclavicular ligaments, as well as partial disruption of the periosteal sleeve.
Radiographs may show slight widening of the AC joint, though the
distance between the clavicle and the coracoid process is unchanged
in comparison to the uninjured shoulder. Treatment of type I and
type II AC injuries is conservative and consists of ice, NSAIDs, and
a sling for immobilization. Shoulder range of motion exercises and
strengthening of the rotator cuff, deltoid, and trapezius musculature

Fig. 728.4 Palpitation of acromioclavicular joint. (From Anderson SJ.
Sports injuries. Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health. 2005;35:105–176.)

4301

are incorporated early in the rehabilitative course once pain-­free
range of motion is achieved in order to prevent residual joint stiffness. A short course of physical therapy may be helpful if range of
motion limitations are present 2-4 weeks out from injury. Consideration for return to play is made when the patient no longer has
focal AC joint tenderness, exhibits full, painless range of motion, has
strength sufficient to be functionally protected from a collision or
fall, and can perform maneuvers required within their sport. Typically, return to play from a type I AC injury is 1-2 weeks, and 2-4
weeks for type II.
Type III AC joint injury is more severe, involving further tearing of
the AC and coracoclavicular ligaments and disruption of the periosteal
sleeve with instability of the distal clavicle because of deltotrapezial fascial detachment. Radiographs will commonly show superior displacement of the distal clavicle from the coracoid of 25–100%. The treatment
of type III AC injuries is controversial. Many can be treated nonoperatively—similar to that described for types I and II AC injuries—if there
is no damage to the overlying skin or neurovascular compromise to the
injured limb. The patient should be counseled that this injury is likely
to result in a noticeable defect to ascertain whether this is acceptable.
Surgery for type III AC injuries is uncommon and primarily for athletes involved with throwing sports or for cosmesis. Types IV, V, and
VI AC joint injuries have progressive worsening of ligamentous and
fascial disruption with varied locations of the clavicular displacement.
These injuries should be referred to an orthopedist for consultation and
operative repair.

ANTERIOR GLENOHUMERAL DISLOCATION

The most common mechanism of injury causing an anterior glenohumeral dislocation is contact with the shoulder abducted to 90 degrees
and forcefully externally rotated. Patients complain of severe pain and
that their shoulder “popped out of place” or “shifted.” Patients with an
unreduced anterior dislocation have a hollow region inferior to the
acromion and a bulge in the anterior portion of the shoulder caused by
anterior displacement of the humeral head. Abnormal sensation of the
lateral deltoid region and the extensor surface of the proximal forearm
should be assessed to evaluate for concomitant injury to the radial or
musculocutaneous nerves, respectively.
Reduction of a dislocated shoulder should be made expediently,
assuming that there is no crepitus to suggest a fracture. Numerous
safe methods for closed reduction have been described, including the
traction–counter traction technique, the Stimson maneuver, and the
abduction maneuver. Postreduction radiographs are helpful and may
show evidence of a posterior lateral humeral head impaction fracture
(Hill-­Sachs lesion). Injuries to the surrounding soft tissues, including
the anterior capsule and labrum, are best evaluated by MRI—often with
an accompanying arthrogram of the glenohumeral joint. Once reduced,
initial treatment of a dislocation includes placing the patient into an
arm sling for comfort and protection. The duration of immobilization
is controversial and may last from a few days to 6 weeks. The most
significant risk after an acute traumatic dislocation is recurrence. Most
sports medicine practitioners encourage early range of motion and
strengthening exercises as tolerated. Rehabilitation focuses on progressive strengthening of the rotator cuff, deltoid, and periscapular muscles
at increasing degrees of abduction and external rotation. Strengthening of the rotator cuff muscles is extremely important because they are
the dynamic stabilizers of the glenohumeral joint and are integral to
the prevention of future dislocation. Plyometric exercises also may be
incorporated near the end of rehabilitation to improve proprioceptive
function in preparation for return to athletics. Patients can return to
play when strength, range of motion, and proprioception are equal
to the uninjured shoulder to the extent that they are able to protect
the shoulder and perform sports-­specific activities without pain. Surgery is to be considered in cases of recurrent dislocations or in those
individuals that fail to heal adequately after prolonged rehabilitation.
Additionally, early operative repair should be considered for athletes
participating in contact or collision sports that inherently have higher
recurrence rates.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4302 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

Type I

Type IV

Type II

Type V

Type III

Type VI

Fig 728.5 Rockwood’s classification of acromioclavicular (AC) joint injuries in children. Type 1, sprain of the AC ligaments without disruption of the

periosteal tube. Type II, partial disruption of the periosteal tube. This may produce some AC instability. Type III, large split in the periosteal tube allowing superior displacement of the lateral clavicle. Type IV, large split in the periosteal tube (large arrow) with posterior displacement of the lateral
clavicle through the trapezius muscle (curved arrow). Type V, complete disruption of the periosteal tube with displacement of the clavicle through the
deltoid and trapezius muscles into the subcutaneous tissues. Type VI, inferior dislocation of the distal clavicle below the coracoid process. (Redrawn
from Sanders JO, Rockwood CA, Curtis RJ. Fractures and dislocations of the humeral shaft and shoulder. In Rockwood CA, Wilkins KE, Beaty JH,
eds. Fractures in Children. Vol 3. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott-­Raven; 1996:974.)

ROTATOR CUFF INJURY

The muscles of the rotator cuff consist of the supraspinatus, infraspinatus, teres minor, and subscapularis. The function of these muscles
is to rotate the humerus and stabilize the humeral head against the
glenoid. The supraspinatus is most commonly injured, either by an
acute traumatic injury or chronic tendinosis from overuse. Specifically,
rotator cuff tendinosis commonly presents with the complaint of pain
with overhead arc of motion, such as with throwing, lifting, or reaching for objects above one’s head. Pain is often poorly localized about
the shoulder, although it may be referred to the deltoid. The onset of
pain is often insidious and is commonly associated with increased frequency or duration of overhead throwing or lifting activities. Pain is
exacerbated with overhead activities but is often present at rest as well;
nighttime pain occurs in more severe cases. On exam, manual muscle
testing of the rotator cuff muscles often produces pain and in some
cases weakness in comparison to the uninjured shoulder. Supraspinatus tendinosis produces pain with active abduction against resistance
in which the patient abducts the arm to 90 degrees, forward flexes to
30 degrees anterior to the parasagittal plane, and internally rotates the
humerus.
The treatment of rotator cuff tendinosis includes relative rest from
athletics or activities causing pain as well as the use of ice, analgesia,
and/or NSAIDs. Strengthening of the rotator cuff and scapular stabilizer musculature, modifications of technique, and core strengthening
are important components of rehabilitation often supervised by a physical therapist. In the young athlete, rotator cuff pain is most commonly

a result of glenohumeral instability and not rotator cuff impingement
syndrome. The latter is more commonly seen in adults and is caused by
impingement of the rotator cuff by the bony structures superior to it.
As a result, treatment focusing on stretching alone can make symptoms
worse. Return to play often includes gradual increases in load placed
upon the rotator cuff as the patient resumes prior activities, such as an
interval throwing program in baseball.
Glenoid labrum tears may present in similar insidious fashion to
rotator cuff tendinosis or may be associated with an acute traumatic
dislocation. This frequently manifests with pain in the glenohumeral
joint and may be associated with mechanical sensations of clicking or
catching in the shoulder. This can frequently be reproduced on exam.
One of the most common lesions is a superior labrum anterior and
posterior (SLAP) lesion. Throwing athletes are at particular risk. The
mechanism of injury is thought to be related to a traction injury along
the long head of the biceps at its attachment at the superior glenoid
labrum, occurring during the throwing cycle. Radiographs are usually normal. MRI with arthrogram is the best study to identify glenoid
labrum pathology (Fig. 728.6).
Proximal humeral stress fracture (epiphysiolysis) is an uncommon cause of proximal shoulder pain and is suspected when shoulder pain does not respond to routine measures. Gradual onset of deep
shoulder pain occurs in a young athlete involved in repetitive overhead
motion, such as in baseball, tennis, or swimming, but with no history
of trauma. Tenderness is noted over the proximal humerus; the diagnosis is confirmed by detecting a widened epiphyseal plate on plain

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 728 u Management of Musculoskeletal Injury

4303

Fig. 728.7 Deflection of the supracondylar fat pad with a joint effusion (fat pad sign) (arrows) showing evidence of a fracture. (Copyright
Laurel Sauer, 2017.)

Fig. 728.6 Coronal intermediate-­
weighted MRI showing superior

labral tear (arrow) and tendinosis of the supraspinatus tendon (arrowhead). There is no adjacent perilabral edema, suggesting chronic
injury. (From Chang, I-­Yuan J, Polster JM. Pathomechanics and magnetic resonance imaging of the thrower’s shoulder. Radiol Clin N Am.
2016;54[5]:801-805. Fig. 13.)

radiographs, increased uptake on nuclear scan, or edema of the physis
on MRI. Treatment is total rest from throwing for at least 6-8 weeks.
Non–sports-­related conditions that need to be considered in any
child with a painful shoulder include an undiagnosed Sprengel deformity. This deformity involves the scapula, which fails to descend from
its cervical region overlying the first through fifth ribs. Children often
present with a shortened neckline and a lack of normal scapular thoracic motion. Malpositioning of a glenoid can cause limited forward
flexion and abduction of the shoulder. An omovertebral bar is present
in up to 50% of cases. This bar connects the superior medial angle of
the scapula and the cervical spine and consists of fibrous cartilaginous
tissue or bone. Other regional abnormalities can include scoliosis with
a prominent scapula on the convex side, congenital rib anomalies, and
undiagnosed Klippel-­Feil syndrome. Winging of the scapula raises the
question of facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy. Family histories
can be most helpful. Primary bone tumors (see Chapter 550) common
to the upper extremities include Ewing sarcoma of the scapula and
osteogenic sarcoma of the proximal humerus, in addition to osteoblastomas and chondroblastomas common to the diaphysis and epiphysis
of long bones. The most common presenting manifestations of osteosarcoma are pain, upper limb dysfunction, and swelling. Similar presentations can be seen in Ewing sarcoma, along with weight loss and
fever. Symptoms not responding to conservative treatment require further investigation and specialty consultation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

728.3 Elbow Injuries
Gregory L. Landry and Andrew M. Watson

ACUTE INJURIES

The most commonly dislocated joint in childhood is the elbow. Radial
head subluxation, or “nursemaid’s elbow,” comprises the majority of
these (see Chapter 722). Posterior dislocation is the next most common
type of elbow dislocation, typically resulting from falling backward
onto an outstretched arm with the elbow in extension. The dislocation
may be complete or incomplete—termed “perched”—with the trochlea
subluxed upon the top of the coronoid process. The ulnar collateral

ligament (UCL) is commonly disrupted along with other components
of the soft tissue capsule about the elbow. Fractures of the olecranon
(>80% occurrence) or medial epicondyle may be present as well. An
obvious deformity is visualized with the olecranon process displaced
prominently behind the distal humerus. Careful examination of the
distal radius and ulnar pulses to assess vascular integrity of the distal
upper arm is important because of the potential for injury to the brachial artery. Sensation to the distal extremity should also be assessed
because of possible injury to the radial, median, and ulnar nerves.
Reduction should be performed as soon as possible before significant
swelling and muscle spasm potentially complicate the procedure. Longitudinal traction is applied to the forearm with gentle upward pressure
on the distal humerus so that the coronoid process clears the trochlea.
If reduction is unable to be performed, the arm should be placed in a
padded splint and sling and the patient transported to an emergency
facility.
Supracondylar humeral fractures can result from the same mechanism of injury as elbow dislocations and can be difficult to distinguish
on exam from a posterior dislocation because of significant swelling
about the elbow joint. These, too, can be complicated by concomitant
injury to the brachial artery and to a lesser extent the median, radial,
and ulnar nerves. The injury typically occurs in the first decade of life,
which is associated with peak hyperlaxity of the elbow joint in children
between the ages of 5-8 years. An acute compartment syndrome can
develop after these fractures, which is associated with a fat pad sign on
radiographs (Fig. 728.7). These fractures should be referred for orthopedic consultation and are discussed in more depth in Chapter 724.
Direct trauma to the elbow can cause bleeding and inflammation
in the olecranon bursa resulting in olecranon bursitis. Aspiration is
rarely required, and this injury can be managed with ice, compressive
dressing, and analgesia (PRICE principles). An overlying elbow pad
provides comfort during activity and prevents re-­injury.

Chronic Injuries

Overuse injuries in the upper extremities occur primarily in throwing sports, sports that require repetitive wrist flexion or extension, or
sports that demand weight-­bearing on hands (gymnastics).
Little Leaguer’s elbow is a broad term for several different elbow
problems. Throwing overhand creates valgus stress to the elbow with
medial opening of the joint and lateral compressive forces. Medial
elbow pain is a common complaint of young throwers, resulting from
repetitive valgus overload of the wrist flexor-­pronator muscle groups
and their attachment on the medial apophysis. In preadolescents who
still have maturing secondary ossification centers, traction apophysitis
of the medial epicondyle is likely. Patients have tenderness along the
medial epicondyle; pain is exacerbated by valgus stress or resisted wrist
flexion and pronation. Wrist pain may be present in more severe cases.
Radiographs may show widening of the growth plate at the medial

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4304 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
apophysis in comparison to the uninjured elbow. Treatment includes
no throwing for 4-6 weeks and pain-­free strengthening and stretching of the flexor-­pronator group followed by a 1-2 week progressive
functional throwing program with careful rehabilitation. Incorporation of core strengthening and scapular stabilizing exercises, as well as
addressing proper throwing mechanics (to reduce the load upon the
medial elbow), are important components of the rehabilitation program. Little Leaguer’s elbow has to be treated with a period of rest from
throwing because of the risk of nonunion of the apophysis and chronic
pain. If pain occurs acutely, an avulsion fracture of the medial epicondyle must be considered. Radiographs should be taken in any thrower
with acute elbow pain. If the medial epicondyle is avulsed (Fig. 728.8),
orthopedic consultation is indicated.
In older adolescents and young adults with a fused apophysis, the
structure at the elbow vulnerable to injury is the UCL. UCL sprains/
tears are common in sports requiring high-­velocity throwing or overhead activities. Medial elbow pain that is worst during the acceleration

A

B
Fig. 728.8 The many faces of little Leaguer’s elbow in a 14-­yr-­old

pitcher. A, AP radiograph and coronal oblique fat-­
saturated T2-­
weighted MRI demonstrate features of chronic medial epicondyle stress
injury (yellow arrow) as well as findings of capitellar osteochondritis dissecans (white arrowhead). Proximal medial ulnar collateral ligament
edema/grade 1 sprain also noted at the humeral attachment (red arrow).
B, Sagittal short tau inversion recovery and fat-­saturated T1-­weighted
MR arthrogram images emphasize the classic features of injury to the
“metaphyseal equivalent” bone deep to the disorganized and obliterated secondary physis of the ossifying capitellum. (From Braithwaite
KA, Marshall KW. The skeletally immature and newly mature throwing
athlete. Radiol Clin N Am. 2016;54[5]:841–855. Fig. 11.)

phase of throwing is common. A loss of throwing velocity and control,
as well as a sensation of elbow joint “opening” during throwing is also
frequently described. On exam, focal tenderness to palpation over the
UCL is present. Additionally, laxity may be appreciated with valgus
stress of the elbow when flexed to 30 and/or 90 degrees. Radiographs
are generally unremarkable. Diagnostic ultrasonography or MRI with
arthrography is often necessary to assess the integrity of the UCL. Partial tears can be treated with a period of time off from throwing (2-4
weeks) followed by careful progressive rehabilitation as discussed earlier for medial elbow pain. If there is a complete tear, surgical repair is
indicated if the athlete desires to continue a pitching career.
Medial epicondylitis, or golfer’s elbow, is another common cause of
medial elbow pain in the individual with fused apophyses. It is commonly caused by overuse of the flexor pronator muscle groups at their
origin at the medial humeral epicondyle. This occurs frequently in athletics or activities with repetitive wrist flexion. Tenderness is noted over
the medial epicondyle and exacerbated by passive wrist extension or
resisted wrist flexion. Treatment includes rest from the inciting activity,
ice, stretching and strengthening of the wrist flexors, forearm straps,
counterforce bracing, and analgesia. Local injection of corticosteroids
can be considered as an adjunctive treatment if initial conservative
measures fail. Ulnar nerve dysfunction can be a complication of valgus
overload and can occur with any of the diagnoses previously discussed.
Persisting paresthesia or motor weakness in the ulnar nerve distribution should be evaluated with electromyography and nerve conduction studies. Diagnostic ultrasonography can also be of use to assess for
focal thickening of the nerve, as a sign of irritation, as well as dynamically visualizing the nerve through the arc of elbow flexion to assess for
subluxation over the medial epicondyle (Fig. 728.9).
Lateral elbow pain can be caused by compression during the throwing motion at the radiocapitellar joint. Panner disease is osteochondrosis of the capitellum that occurs between ages 7 and 12 years (Fig.
728.10). OCD of the capitellum occurs at age 13-16 years (see Fig.
728.1). Although patients with both conditions present with insidious onset of lateral elbow pain exacerbated by throwing, patients with
OCD have mechanical symptoms (popping, locking) and, more commonly, decreased range of motion. Patients with Panner disease have
no mechanical symptoms and often have normal range of motion. The
prognosis of Panner disease is excellent, and treatment consists of relative rest (no throwing), brief immobilization, and repeat radiographs
in 6-12 weeks to assess bone remodeling. In OCD, radiographs show a
more focal lesion in the capitellum with eventual flattening and potentially fragmentation. MRI can be very helpful in early diagnosis and
with subsequent staging. A diagnosis of OCD requires orthopedic consultation, with treatment depending on the severity of the lesion and
fragmentation.
Lateral epicondylitis, or “tennis elbow,” is the most common overuse elbow injury in adults but is relatively uncommon in children and
adolescents (Fig. 728.11). It is a tendinosis of the extensor muscle origin
at the lateral humeral epicondyle, which is commonly found in individuals performing activities requiring repetitive or prolonged grip.
Tenderness is localized over the upper lateral epicondyle and is worsened with passive wrist flexion or resisted wrist extension. Treatment
includes relative rest, analgesia, and specific stretching and strengthening exercises for the elbow and forearm. As with medial epicondylitis,
corticosteroid injection can be considered as an adjunctive treatment
if initial conservative measures fail. Improper equipment (i.e., wrong
grip size or overstrung racket) and poor technique can contribute to
the onset of symptoms. Return to play should be gradual and progressive to prevent re-injury.
Elbow injuries can be minimized but not necessarily prevented by
preseason stretching and strengthening exercises. The importance of
core strengthening and scapular stabilization with respect to preventing elbow and shoulder injuries in the throwing athlete cannot be overstated. The most important consideration for preventing elbow injuries
in throwers is limitation of the number of pitches and advising players, coaches, and athletes that they should stop immediately when they
experience elbow pain. If it persists, they need medical evaluation. It
has been recommended that a young pitcher have age-­specific limits

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 728 u Management of Musculoskeletal Injury

4305

A

B

Fig. 728.10 Panner disease. Note fragmentation of the humeral capitellum and flattening of the articular surface (arrow). (Copyright Laurel
Sauer, 2017.)

728.4 Low Back Injuries
Gregory L. Landry and Andrew M. Watson

C
Fig. 728.9 Ulnar nerve subluxation. Dynamic ultrasound imaging of

the ulnar nerve (arrow) in the ulnar groove at the elbow. A, The ulnar
nerve positioned appropriately in the ulnar groove with the elbow extended. With elbow flexion, (B) the nerve becomes perched upon the
medial epicondyle. As the elbow moves into terminal flexion, (C) the
nerve is completely dislocated anteriorly over the medial epicondyle.
(Courtesy Nicholas Goyeneche, MD, ultrasound clinic files, Ochsner
Clinic Medical Center.)

on pitch counts, including the number of pitches thrown per game and
per week, as well as maintaining appropriate days off between games
pitched. A good rule of thumb is that the maximal number of pitches
per game should be approximately 6 times the pitcher’s age in years.
Other less-­common problems that cause elbow pain are ulnar neuropathy/subluxation, tricipital or bicipital tendonitis (distal), olecranon apophysitis, and loose bodies. Non–sports-­related injuries that
need to be considered in the child with a painful elbow include undiagnosed congenital conditions such as radial dysplasia, including radial
ulnar synostosis and mild persistent brachial plexus palsy. The elbow is
not an uncommon site for inflammatory arthritides, including juvenile
idiopathic arthritis, sepsis, hemophilia, and sickle cell disease. Neoplasia to consider includes osteoblastomas and chondroblastomas, which
are common in the diaphysis and epiphysis of longer bones, in addition
to osteosarcoma. As always, in the child with persistent symptoms who
is not responding to conservative care, further diagnostic workup is
indicated.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

SPONDYLOLYSIS, SPONDYLOLISTHESIS, AND
FACET SYNDROME
Spondylolysis

Spondylolysis, a common cause of back pain in athletes, is a stress
fracture of the pars interarticularis (see Chapter 720.6). It can occur at
any vertebral level but is most likely at L5. Complete spondylolysis has
never been found in the newborn. Its occurrence increases between
the ages of 5.5 and 6.5 years to a rate of 5%. Prevalence in adolescent
athletes evaluated for low back pain is 13–47%. Besides hyperextension that causes an acute fracture, the mechanism of injury is either a
congenital defect or hypoplastic pars. This is exacerbated by repetitive
lumbar extension loading. Ballet, weightlifting, gymnastics, and football are examples of sports in which repetitive extension loading of the
lumbar spine frequently occurs.
Patients often present with pain of insidious onset. However, there
may be a precipitating injury, such as a fall, or a single episode of hyperextension. The pain is worse with extension, may radiate to the buttocks, and can eventually affect activities of daily living. Rest or supine
positioning usually alleviates the pain.
On examination, the pain is reproduced with lumbar extension
while standing, especially when standing on one leg (single-­leg hyperextension test). Limited forward spinal flexion and tight hamstrings
may be seen. Neurologic examination is generally normal. There is
often well-­localized tenderness to deep palpation just lateral to the
involved spinous process.
The diagnosis can be confirmed by finding a pars defect on an oblique
lumbar spine radiograph. The defect is rarely seen on anteroposterior

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4306 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

A

C

B

D

Fig. 728.11 A 22-­yr-­old tennis player with persistent lateral elbow pain despite 3 months of physical therapy. A, Coronal T1 sequence shows

thickening and intermediate signal in the common extensor tendon (CET; arrow). B, Coronal T2 fat suppression (FS) (CET; arrow) and (C) axial proton
density FS sequences reveal fluid signal within the CET and discontinuity of tendon fibers, consistent with a partial-­thickness tear (CET; arrow). D,
Corresponding long axis ultrasound image shows an anechoic fluid cleft (arrow) in the undersurface of the CET (arrowheads). (From Gustas CN, Lee
KS. Current imaging concepts and image-­guided treatments for the injured thrower’s elbow. Radiol Clin N Am. 2016;54[5]:817–839. Fig. 2.)

(AP) and lateral views. MRI or bone single-­
photon emission CT
(SPECT) is needed to confirm diagnosis if radiographs are normal
and spondylolysis is suspected. A plain CT scan can help identify the
degree of bony involvement and is sometimes used to assess healing.
Treatment includes pain relief and activity restriction. Rehabilitation
consisting of trunk strengthening, hip flexor stretching, and hamstring
stretching is important in most cases. A thoracic lumbar sacral orthotic
may be considered for symptom management in cases in which conservative measures fail, but the overall benefit of bracing on healing is
unclear.

Spondylolisthesis and Facet Syndrome

Spondylolysis, spondylolisthesis, and facet syndrome are injuries to
the posterior elements of the vertebrae. Spondylolisthesis occurs when
bilateral pars defects exist and forward displacement or slippage of a
vertebra occurs upon the vertebra inferior to it (see Chapter 720.6).
Facet syndrome has history and physical examination findings similar to those of spondylolysis. It is caused by instability or injury to the
facet joint, posterior to the pars interarticularis and at the interface of
the inferior and superior articulating processes. Facet syndrome can be
established by identifying facet abnormalities on CT or by exclusion, if
a radiograph and MRI rule out spondylolysis.
Treatment of posterior element injuries is conservative and directed
at reducing the extension-­loading activity, often for 2-3 months. Body
mechanics, posture principals, core strengthening, and lumbar pelvic
stabilization routines can be very helpful in the functional recovery of
the motivated athlete. Walking, swimming, and cycling can be appropriate exercises during the rehabilitation phase. Rarely, spinal segmental fusion can be indicated in the athlete with spondylolisthesis and
persistent symptomatic segmental instability despite conservative care.

LUMBAR DISK HERNIATION, STRAIN, AND
CONTUSION

Intervertebral disk injury in children and adolescents is uncommon.
Symptoms include pain with prolonged standing and prolonged periods of lumbar flexion, such as sitting in a car. Presentation is variable,

and patients may report an acute pain onset with an obvious inciting
event or an insidious onset with a history of heavy lifting or repetitive axial load activities. In contrast to the selective motor and sensory deficits often observed in adults with disk herniation, athletes
younger than 20 years of age less commonly have pain or tenderness
over the course of the sciatic nerve. Physical examination findings
may be minimal but usually include pain with forward flexion and
lateral bending. It is unusual to have a positive straight leg test or any
neurologic deficit in the young athlete with an injured disk. There
may be tenderness of the vertebral spinous process at the level of the
disk injury. A general aching sensation in the lower back or upper
buttocks may be present. MRI usually confirms a clinical diagnosis.
Assuming the herniation is not large and the pain is not intractable,
treatment is conservative with analgesia and physical therapy. Surgery is rarely necessary.
Acute lumbar strain or contusion can be seen in the younger athlete and is usually associated with precipitating activity often outside
of the normal routine. Physical examination reveals tenderness in the
paraspinal and lateral soft tissues often associated with recreating the
mechanism of injury. Thoracic and lumbar strain in the school-­age
child is frequently associated with obesity, deconditioning, positive
family history, and poorly supervised and equipped recreational activity. Up to 20% of youths have experienced back pain at some point in
their life before the age of 15 years. The backpack is the most common
cause of back pain of a benign nature in children, with up to 74% of
school backpack–wearers experiencing pain. Back pain is more common with the heavy backpack (>10–20% of body weight), female sex,
large body mass index, and single shoulder strap.
Treatment is conservative and includes analgesia, myofascial release,
massage, and physical therapy, as tolerated. The natural history of acute
back strain in adults is that 50% are better in 1 week, 80% in 1 month,
and 90% in 2 months, regardless of therapy. The course of back pain in
young athletes is likely similar given the elimination of obvious precipitating influence and/or activities, as discussed previously.
Sacroiliitis manifests as pain over the sacroiliac joints; it is usually
chronic but is occasionally associated with a history of trauma. Patients

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 728 u Management of Musculoskeletal Injury
have a positive result with the Patrick test, performed in the supine position by resting the foot of the affected side across the opposite knee (“figure-4” position), stabilizing the contralateral iliac crest, and externally
rotating the hip on the affected side (pushing the knee down and lateral).
Symptomatic improvement with knee-­to-­chest maneuvers and subsequent posterior pelvic tilt may be present. A radiograph of the sacroiliac
joints is indicated, and if results are positive, exploration for a rheumatologic disease (ankylosing spondylitis [see Chapter 197], juvenile idiopathic
arthritis [see Chapter 196], or inflammatory bowel disease [see Chapter
382]) is warranted.
Treatment is with relative rest, NSAIDs, and physical therapy. Ankylosing spondylitis is more likely if the onset of lower back pain is before 40
years of age, if there is morning stiffness demonstrating improvement with
activity, a family history is present, there is clear benefit from antiinflammatory medication, and if the pain has a gradual onset having lasted longer
than 3 months.

OTHER CAUSES

Non–sports-­related causes of low back pain in the young athlete are
numerous and include infection (osteomyelitis, diskitis) and neoplasia (see Chapter 720.5). These should be considered in patients with
fever, weight loss, other constitutional signs, or lack of response to initial therapy. Osteomyelitis of the lower back or pelvis is often, but not
always, associated with fever. Undiagnosed Scheuermann disease needs
to be considered with a history of chronic back pain; it is more common in males and younger adolescents and should be distinguished
from symptomatic postural roundback and congenital decompensating
kyphosis. Atypical Scheuermann disease or thoracolumbar apophysitis
can progress and become the pediatric equivalent of an adult compression fracture. Benign tumors of the spine include osteoid osteoma, which
presents with intense focal nighttime pain that is not activity related and
is almost always relieved by aspirin or NSAIDs. Undiagnosed osteoblastoma, eosinophilic granuloma, aneurysmal bone cyst, and fibrous dysplasia are additional benign tumors not to be excluded. Malignant spinal
tumors include Ewing sarcoma (onion skin appearance) and osteogenic
sarcoma (sunburst pattern); both are associated with the Codman triangle, which is the triangular area of new subperiosteal bone seen on
radiographs when a tumor raises the periosteum away from the bone.
Metastatic tumors of the spine include neuroblastoma, spinal cord
tumors, leukemia, and lymphoma. Wilms tumor can also metastasize
to the spine and be associated with hemihypertrophy. Referred pain to
the spine always needs to be considered. Conditions that can refer pain
include pyelonephritis, renal osteodystrophy, pneumonia, endocarditis, cholecystitis, nephrolithiasis, pancreatitis, megacolon, constipation/
ileus, hiatal hernia/reflux, pelvic inflammatory disease, and sickle cell
crisis. Undiagnosed pregnancy is a consideration in the age-­appropriate
female. Psychogenic pain and fibromyalgia can be seen in children. Child
abuse can present in the spine, with soft tissue injuries more common
than fractures. Posterior rib and spinous process fractures can be seen in
up to 30% of abused children.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

4307

728.5 Hip and Pelvis Injuries
Gregory L. Landry and Andrew M. Watson
Injuries to the hip and pelvis represent a small percentage of sports
injuries, but they are potentially severe and require prompt diagnosis.
Hip pathology can manifest as knee pain with normal findings on knee
examination.
In children, transient synovitis (see Chapter 719.2) is the most
common nontraumatic cause of hip pain. It usually manifests with
acute onset of a limp, with the child refusing to use the affected leg
and painful range of motion on examination. There may be a history of
minor trauma or a recent viral infection. This is a self-­limiting condition that usually resolves in 48-72 hours.
Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease (avascular necrosis of the femoral
head) also presents in childhood with insidious onset of limp and hip
pain (see Chapter 719.3).
Until skeletal maturity (Table 728.2), younger athletes are susceptible to apophyseal injuries (e.g., the anterior superior iliac spine).
Apophysitis develops from overuse or from direct trauma. Avulsion
fractures occur in adolescents playing sports requiring sudden, explosive bursts of speed (see Fig. 728.2). Large muscles contract and create
force greater than the strength of the attachment of the muscle to the
apophysis. Biomechanical susceptibility of the pelvis allows separation to occur in the cartilaginous region between the apophysis and
the adjoining bone. The most common sites of pelvic avulsion fractures are the anterior superior iliac spine (sartorius and tensor fasciae
lata), anterior inferior iliac spine (rectus femoris), lesser femoral trochanter (iliopsoas), ischial tuberosity (hamstrings), and the iliac crest
(abdominal muscles). Symptoms include localized pain and swelling
with decreased strength and range of motion. Bilateral radiographs are
important for comparison to assess for displacement, if any, of the fracture fragment. Significant displacement or the presence of a large fragment may require orthopedic consultation. Initial treatment includes
ice, analgesics, rest, and pain-­free range of motion exercises. Crutches
are usually needed initially for ambulation. Surgery is not typically
indicated because most of these fractures—even large or displaced
ones—heal well. Direct contact to the bone around the hip and pelvis
causes exquisitely tender subperiosteal hematomas called “hip pointers.” These injuries are more commonly seen around the anterior superior iliac spine and the iliac crest. Limited active range of motion can be
identified about the hip, brought on by contracture of locally attached
musculature such as hip flexors and hip abductors. Symptomatic care
includes rest, ice, analgesia, and protection from re-­injury.
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis usually occurs among 11-­to
15-­year-­olds during the time of rapid linear bone growth (see Chapter
719.4) and often presents with complaints of pain in the groin area or,
on occasion, referred pain felt at the knee. Bilateral hip radiographs
confirm the diagnosis.
A femoral neck stress fracture can manifest as vague progressive
hip pain in an endurance athlete. Females are at higher risk. This diagnosis should be suspected in the running athlete with vague anterior

Table 728.2  Age of Appearance and Fusion of Apophyses in Hip and Pelvis
APOPHYSIS

FUSION (YR)

RELATED MUSCLE GROUP(S)

Anterior inferior iliac spine

APPEARANCE (YR)
13-15

16-18

Quadriceps

Anterior superior iliac spine

13-15

21-25

Sartorius

Lesser trochanter

11-12

16-17

Iliopsoas

Greater trochanter

2-3

16-17

Gluteal

Ischial tuberosity

13-15

20-25

Hamstrings

Iliac crest

13-15

21-25

Abdominal obliques
Latissimus dorsi

From Waite BL, Krabak BJ. Examination and treatment of pediatric injuries of the hip and pelvis. Phys Med Rehabil Clin N Am. 2008;19:305–318.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4308 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
thigh pain without a history of trauma or acute injury. On examination, there may be pain with passive stretch of the hip flexors and
pain with hip rotation. If radiographs do not demonstrate a periosteal reaction consistent with a stress fracture, MRI may be indicated
to confirm the suspected diagnosis and determine the location of the
fracture. Orthopedic consultation is necessary in femoral neck stress
fractures because of their predisposition to nonunion and displacement with minor trauma or continued weight-­bearing. These fractures
carry increased risk of avascular necrosis of the femoral head. Whereas
compression (inferomedial) side femoral neck stress fractures can typically be treated conservatively with non–weight-­bearing, tension side
(superolateral femoral neck) fractures may be at particular risk of progression and often require surgical fixation.
Osteitis pubis is an inflammation at the pubic symphysis that may be
caused by excessive side-­to-­side rocking of the pelvis. It can be seen in
an athlete in any running sport and is more common in sports requiring additional use of the adductor muscles such as ice hockey, soccer,
and inline skating. Athletes typically present with vague groin pain that
may be unilateral or bilateral. On physical examination, there is tenderness over the symphysis and sometimes over the proximal adductors.
Adduction strength testing causes discomfort. Radiographic evidence
(irregularity, sclerosis, widening of the pubic symphysis with osteolysis) may not be present until symptoms are present for 6-8 weeks; MRI
is more sensitive to early changes. Relative rest for 6-12 weeks may be
required. Some patients require corticosteroid injection as adjunctive therapy. Ultrasound needle guidance may be used to improve the
accuracy of the injection while simultaneously avoiding injury to surrounding structures, such as the bladder, and vascular structures of the
genitalia.
Acetabular labrum tears can occur in the hip, similar to glenoid
labrum tears in the shoulder. Athletes may have a history of trauma
and complain of sharp anterior hip pain associated with a clicking or
catching sensation. Clinical diagnosis is often difficult; magnetic resonance arthrography is the gold standard for diagnosis, but MRI may be
useful as well.
Snapping hip syndrome is caused by the iliopsoas musculotendinous unit riding over the pectineal eminence of the pelvis, anterior
hip capsule, or the iliotibial band (ITB) over the greater trochanter.
Lack of flexibility in these muscles results in snapping, as the musculotendinous unit slides over the associated bony prominence. It is most
commonly seen in ballet dancers and runners, and it can occur as an
acute or, more commonly, overuse injury. Athletes present with either
a painful or painless click or snap in the hip, usually located lateral or
anterior and deep within the joint. Examination often reproduces the
symptoms. Radiographs are not usually needed in the workup. Ultrasound examination can be useful to visualize the anatomic structures
in question causing the snapping sensation. Core weakness may be
present, leading to excessive movement about the hip girdle contributing to increased sliding of the tight muscle over the boney prominence.
Treatment involves analgesia, relative rest, biomechanical assessment,
core flexibility, and stretching/strengthening of the involved soft tissue. Patients with concomitant greater trochanteric bursitis may benefit from a corticosteroid injection into the inflamed bursa to improve
pain control and facilitate rehabilitation. The athlete may return to
activity as tolerated. Common soft tissue injuries around the hip and
pelvis include strain and tendinosis of the hip flexors (groin) and hamstrings in addition to quadriceps contusions and greater trochanteric
bursitis.
The term athletic pubalgia is commonly used to describe a number of different pathologies that may cause lower abdominal or groin
pain. Often called a sports hernia, this is a source of confusion as
no true hernia exists through the inguinal canal or abdominal wall.
The pathophysiology stems from tissue injury to the structures that
comprise the pubic aponeurosis, most commonly the tendinous
attachment of the abdominal and hip adductor musculature. Like a
true hernia, pain may radiate into the anterior thigh, inguinal region,
perineum, and/or scrotum. Physical exam may exhibit tenderness
over, or adjacent to, the pubic ramus and/or reproduction of pain
with resisted abdominal flexion or hip adduction. MRI, CT scan, and

bone scan can be helpful in ruling out other diagnoses but usually
are negative. Some radiology departments may have MRI protocols
specific for athletic pubalgia that provide more detailed imaging of
the pathologic area. Patients who continue with symptoms despite
conservative care, such as physical therapy, may be candidates for surgical intervention.
Femoroacetabular impingement (FAI) may coexist with athletic
pubalgia to produce groin pain. FAI is defined as an abnormal contact
between the femoral neck and the acetabulum as a result of excessive
bone on the acetabular rim, the femoral neck, or both. X-­rays and MRI
can be diagnostic. As in athletic pubalgia, a period of rest and rehabilitation should be attempted, and those who fail conservative treatment
should be referred to a sports medicine specialist.
Undiagnosed non–sports-­related conditions need to be considered. Differential diagnoses may include the epiphyseal dysplasias,
congenital or developmental hip dysplasia, additional causes of avascular necrosis, including sickle cell disease, Gaucher disease, rheumatoid
arthritis, and other collagen disorders and steroid therapy. Inguinal
hernia should be recognized in those patients with groin pain exacerbated with coughing/Valsalva maneuver and a palpable mass in the
groin. Traumatic hip dislocations are relatively rare in children but
should not be overlooked. Leg-­length discrepancies (usually >1 cm)
can be symptomatic at the hip in an otherwise healthy child. Common tumors in the lower extremities include osteosarcoma along with
osteoblastoma, aneurysmal bone cysts, and fibrous dysplasia (more
common in the pelvis). Metastatic tumors to the lower extremities
include neuroblastoma, lymphoma, and leukemic infiltration with
joint arthralgia. Child abuse always needs to be considered in a young
patient with musculoskeletal pain.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

728.6 Knee Injuries
Gregory L. Landry and Andrew M. Watson
Knee pain is common among adolescents. Acute knee injuries that
cause immediate disability and/or effusion are likely to be due to fracture, patellar dislocation, anterior or posterior cruciate ligament injury,
or meniscal tear. The mechanism of injury is usually a weight-­bearing
event. Physeal injuries tend to predominate in younger patients,
whereas more skeletally mature adolescents tend to sustain ligamentous injuries. If the knee swells more immediately (within several hours
of injury), the swelling is likely caused by a hemarthrosis and more
severe injury. The injury most likely to occur with a hemarthrosis is
an anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) injury. This injury (rare in children younger than 12 years) is usually caused by direct contact, landing
off-­balance from a jump, quickly changing direction while running, or
hyperextension. Instability is often present but may be hard to detect
in the presence of significant swelling. Females are more than twice as
likely as males to disrupt their ACL, often during sports such as basketball or soccer. Occasionally, these injuries are associated with an
avulsion injury of the anterior tibial spine. Most athletes with significant ACL injury need orthopedic consultation with consideration of
ACL reconstruction. Chronic ACL insufficiency may increase the risk
of meniscal injury, early osteoarthritis, and further joint dysfunction.
Physeal-­sparing reconstructions with minimal risk of growth arrest or
angular deformity have been reported with success in children younger
than 12 years and adolescents.
Posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) injury occurs from a direct blow
to the region of the proximal tibia when the knee is flexed, such as
might occur with a dashboard injury or a fall to the knees in volleyball.
PCL injuries are rare and are usually treated nonsurgically.
Medial collateral ligament injuries typically result from a valgus
blow to the outside of the knee. Isolated lateral collateral ligament
injuries are uncommon and result from significant varus knee stress.
Because they are extra-­articular, lateral collateral and medial collateral
ligament injuries should not produce a significant knee effusion and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 728 u Management of Musculoskeletal Injury
are generally less disabling. Isolated medial and lateral collateral injuries are generally managed nonsurgically with conservative care and
appropriate rehabilitation.
Meniscal tears generally occur by the same mechanisms as ACL
injuries. They are often associated with less hemarthrosis, significant
joint line pain, and increased pain with full knee flexion. MRI will usually yield the diagnosis; conservative care, including PRICE principles,
is therapeutic for smaller injuries. Orthopedic consultation is indicated
for meniscus tears in children and adolescents, and surgery may be
indicated for larger tears, displaced tears, or those not healing with
conservative care over 6-8 weeks. An isolated meniscal tear in a child
younger than 10 years of age is unusual. The surgical choice is often
repair of the meniscus rather than resection because of the increased
potential in children for cartilaginous healing. Discoid meniscus (an
anatomic variant covering lateral tibial plateau) should be considered
in children younger than 12 years of age and those with a suspected
meniscus injury without a history of notable trauma.
Patellar dislocation occurs most often as a noncontact injury when
the quadriceps muscles forcefully contract to extend the knee while the
tibia is externally rotated in relation to the femur. Patellar dislocation is
the second most common cause of hemarthrosis. The patella is almost
always dislocated laterally, and this motion tears the medial patellar
retinaculum, causing bleeding in the joint. Recurrent episodes of patellar instability are associated with less swelling. Patellar dislocations are
often associated with genu valgum, external tibial torsion, and general
ligamentous hyperlaxity. Exercises to strengthen the quadriceps, particularly the vastus medialis, and the use of patella-­tracking braces may
be helpful. Recurrent instability can require surgical intervention. Surgical stabilization of the medial patellar tissues and lateral retinacular
release can be helpful in more difficult cases.

4309

INITIAL TREATMENT OF ACUTE KNEE INJURIES

The physician should inspect for an effusion and obvious deformities;
if any deformity is present, the physician should assess neurovascular status and transfer the patient for emergency care as indicated. If
no gross deformities are present and neurovascular integrity is intact,
initial maneuvers include full passive extension and gentle valgus and
varus stress to the knee while in extension. Any laxity to varus or valgus
stress in full extension implies a multiligamentous injury. Comparison to
the noninjured knee is always helpful for assessing degrees of laxity and
range of motion. The patient’s ability to contract the quadriceps should
be noted. Pain occurring with quadriceps contraction, or the inability
to contract the quadriceps muscle, implies an injury to the extensor
mechanism. Tenderness over the medial patella, medial retinaculum,
or above the adductor tubercle is associated with a patellar dislocation
(usually lateral). Point tenderness is consistent with fracture or injury
to the underlying structure. Meniscal tears usually manifest as tenderness along the joint line, accentuated with flexion of the knee beyond
90 degrees. Pain or limitation in either flexion or extension while rotating the tibia implies a meniscal injury. Ligament injury is manifested as
pain or laxity with the appropriate maneuver (Fig. 728.12).
If a patient cannot weight-­bear without pain, or has clinical signs
of instability, significant swelling, or any other major concern, the
knee should be immobilized and crutches provided. The Ottawa knee
rule, which has been validated for children over 5 years of age, helps
determine which patients with mild knee injuries require radiographs.
X-­rays should be obtained if any of the following apply: 55 years or
older, point tenderness of fibular head, tenderness of the patella, inability to flex knee to 90 degrees, or inability to bear weight (inability to
take four steps) both immediately after the injury and in the emergency
department.

Valgus stress
and flexion

Internal
rotation
20°-30°
Lachman test

Lateral pivot shift test
90°
Valgus stress
and extension
Anterior drawer test

External
rotation

Apley compression test

McMurray test

Fig. 728.12 Examination maneuvers include the Lachman, anterior drawer, lateral pivot shift, Apley compression, and McMurray tests. The Lach-

man test, performed to detect anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) injuries, is conducted with the patient supine and the knee flexed 20-30 degrees.
The anterior drawer test detects ACL injuries and is performed with the patient supine and the knee in 90 degrees of flexion. The lateral pivot shift
test is performed with the patient supine, the hip flexed 45 degrees, and the knee in full extension. Internal rotation is applied to the tibia while the
knee is flexed to 40 degrees under a valgus stress (pushing the outside of the knee medially). The Apley compression test, used to assess meniscal integrity, is performed with the patient prone and the examiner’s knee over the patient’s posterior thigh. The tibia is externally rotated while a
downward compressive force is applied over the tibia. The McMurray test, used to assess meniscal integrity, is performed with the patient supine
and the examiner standing on the side of the affected knee.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4310 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
If the patella is dislocated, reduction may be achieved with gentle
active assistive knee extension. Straight-­
leg immobilizers offer no
structural support and are only used for comfort and reminding the
patient to be careful with any weight-­bearing. A derotational hinge
brace may be indicated for stabilization, such as after an injury involving both the ACL and medial collateral ligament. The leg should be
elevated, and an elastic wrap can be applied for compression (PRICE
principles).

CHRONIC INJURIES
Patellofemoral Stress Syndrome

Patellofemoral stress syndrome (PFSS), or runner’s knee, is the most
common cause of anterior knee pain. PFSS is also known as patellofemoral pain syndrome or patellofemoral dysfunction (see Chapter
718.5). It is a diagnosis of exclusion used to describe anterior knee pain
that has no other identifiable pathology. Chondromalacia may be seen
in association with softening of the articular cartilage underneath the
patellar surface. Pain is usually difficult to localize. Patients indicate a
diffuse area over the anterior knee as the source, or they might feel as
if the pain is originating from underneath the patella. Bilateral pain
is common, and pain is often worse going up stairs, after sitting for
prolonged periods, or after squatting or running. There should be a
negative history for significant swelling or true mechanical symptoms,
which would indicate a more serious injury. History of change in activity is common, such as altered training surface or terrain, increased
training regimen, or performance of new tasks.
Examination should include evaluation of stance and gait for lower
limb alignment, musculature, and midfoot hyperpronation. Flexibility of the hamstrings, iliotibial band, and gastrocnemius should be
assessed, because stress is increased across the patellofemoral joint
when these structures are excessively tight. Hip range of motion should
be assessed to rule out hip pathology. Medial patellar tenderness or
pain with compression of the patellofemoral joint confirms the diagnosis in the absence of a significant effusion and other positive findings.
PFSS is a clinical diagnosis usually managed without imaging.
Treatment focuses on assessing and improving flexibility, strength,
and gait abnormalities. In the presence of midfoot hyperpronation
(ankle valgus), new shoes or the use of arch supports can improve
patellofemoral mechanics and alleviate pain. Ice and analgesics can be
used to help control pain. Reduced overall activity or training is important initially in rehabilitation. Short arc quadriceps strengthening exercises can be helpful: active knee extension with or without resistance
between 0 and 30 degrees of knee flexion. Hip and core strengthening
exercises are also beneficial. Therapeutic taping techniques to improve
patella tracking within the trochlear groove can be helpful with the
assistance of a sports physical therapist. The use of a patellar stabilizing
brace with a lateral buttress to maintain patellar alignment may be of
benefit in more chronic cases as well.

Osgood-­Schlatter Disease

Osgood-­Schlatter disease is a traction apophysitis occurring at the
insertion of the patellar tendon on the tibial tuberosity (see Chapter
718.4). Because it is also related to overuse of the extensor mechanism, Osgood-­Schlatter disease is treated like PFSS. A protective pad
to protect the tibial tubercle from direct trauma can be used. Therapeutic taping of the tibial tubercle may provide comfort, along with
well-­fitted knee sleeves and/or straps. NSAIDs are often prescribed for
comfort. Stretching focused on the quadriceps and hamstrings is recommended, and PRICE principles apply. Patients and parents should
be made aware that resolution is usually slow, often requiring 12-18
months. Complications are rare and can include growth arrest with
recurvatum deformity and rupture or avulsion of the patellar tendon/
tibial tubercle.

Other Chronic Injuries

Sinding-­Larsen-­Johansson disease is a traction apophysitis occurring
at the inferior pole of the patella. It occurs most often in volleyball and
basketball athletes. Treatment is similar to PFSS and Osgood-­Schlatter
disease.

Patellar tendinosis, or jumper’s knee, is caused by repetitive microtrauma of the patellar tendon, usually at the inferior pole of the patella.
In approximately 10% of cases, the quadriceps tendon above the patella
is affected. It is associated with jumping sports but may occur in runners as well. Treatment is similar to that for PFSS, with an emphasis
on eccentric strengthening in physical therapy. Relative rest is more
important in patellar tendinosis because chronic pain can be associated
with irreversible changes in the tendon. In these cases, recalcitrant to
rest, activity modifications, and physical therapy, there may be a role of
biologic injections such as platelet-­rich plasma to the pathologic area.
Surgical techniques also have a good success rate if needed.
Iliotibial band (ITB) friction syndrome is the most common cause
of chronic lateral knee pain. Generally, it is not associated with swelling
or instability. It is from friction of the ITB along the lateral knee, resulting in bursitis. Tenderness is elicited along the ITB as it courses over the
lateral femoral condyle or at its insertion at Gerdy’s tubercle along the
lateral tibial plateau. Tightness of the ITB is also noted using the Ober
test. To perform an Ober test, the athlete lies on one side, the inferior
hip is flexed, and the superior hip is extended with the knee flexed. The
examiner holds the superior foot in midair, and if the superior knee
drops inferiorly toward the exam table, it implies a flexible ITB and a
negative Ober test. If the knee and leg stay in midair, the Ober test is
positive, suggesting a tight ITB. Treatment principles follow those for
PFSS, except the emphasis is on improving flexibility of the ITB.
Other soft tissue injuries to be considered include prepatellar and
pes anserine bursitis, plical syndromes, and Hoffa syndrome. The pes
anserine bursa lies just under the conjoined tendon of the sartorius,
gracilis, and semitendinosus muscles as it attaches medially to the
proximal tibia. In Hoffa syndrome, the fat pad beneath the patella and
posterior to the patella ligament becomes pinched with anterior pain
on knee extension. These conditions are generally more common in
adolescents, those with genu recurvatum, and long-­distance runners.
Undiagnosed non–sports-­related conditions always need to be considered in the context of any child with a painful knee, particularly those
younger than 12 years old. These include conditions such as OCD (see
Chapter 718.3), which is most common on the lateral aspect of the
medial femoral condyle. Inflammatory and infectious arthritis, Baker
cyst (see Chapter 718.2), and hip pain referred to the knee are additional considerations. Tumors more common to the knee joint include
osteogenic sarcoma (distal femoral and proximal tibial), Langerhans
cell histiocytosis in the diaphysis, and eosinophilic granuloma in the
epiphysis of long bones. Metastatic tumors to the lower extremities
include neuroblastoma and lymphoma. As with any musculoskeletal
injury in a child not responding to conservative care, more in-­depth
diagnostic pursuit for alternative pathology is mandatory.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

728.7 Lower Leg Exertional Pain: Shin
Splints, Stress Fractures, and Chronic
Compartment Syndrome
Gregory L. Landry and Andrew M. Watson
Stress injury to the bones of the lower leg occurs on a continuum from
mild injury (shin splints) to stress fracture. All occur by an overuse
mechanism.
Medial tibial stress syndrome, or shin splints, manifests with pain
along the medial tibia and is the most common overuse injury of the
lower leg. The pain initially appears toward the end of exercise, and if
exercise continues without rehabilitation, the pain worsens and occurs
earlier in the exercise period. There is diffuse tenderness over the lower
third to half of the distal medial tibia. Any focal tenderness of the tibia
is suspicious for a tibial stress fracture. A stress fracture tends to be
associated with more severe pain and is painful during the entire workout. Shin splints and stress fractures represent a continuum of stress
injury to the tibia and are thought to be related to traction of the soleus

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 728 u Management of Musculoskeletal Injury
on the tibia. Eccentric contraction of the medial aspect of the soleus is
required to control pronation from initial contact to mid-­stance with
running. This contraction increases the stress of the fascial origin of the
soleus, possibly through Sharpey fibers, causing disruption to the tibial
periosteum and fibrocartilaginous attachments.
The diagnosis can be made by history and physical examination.
Findings on plain radiographs of the tibia are typically unremarkable
with shin splints, as well as with tibial stress fractures within the first 2
weeks of injury. Beyond this time frame, radiographs may demonstrate
periosteal reaction if a stress fracture is present but may still be unremarkable. Sensitivity of plain radiographs can be increased by obtaining four views of the tibia: AP, lateral, and both oblique views. MRI is
the most sensitive test to diagnose stress injuries as it can reveal both
a stress fracture and stress reaction in the affected bone. Stress reactions may include bone marrow edema or periosteal reaction without
a fracture line but represent an impending progression to a fracture if
the offending stress is not reduced or eliminated.
The treatment of shin splints involves relative rest, correcting
training errors, and addressing muscle imbalances and abnormal
mechanical alignment. Orthotics and/or new shoes may be useful
in patients who hyperpronate. Fitness can be maintained with non–
weight-­bearing activities, such as swimming, cycling, and water jogging. With shin splints, after 7-10 days, patients can usually start on
the walk-­jog program. If pain worsens, 2-3 pain-­free days are required
before resuming the walk-­jog program. Ice should be used daily, and
an analgesic should be used for pain control. Stretching the plantar
flexors and hamstrings and strengthening the ankle dorsiflexors may
be useful. Therapeutic taping and wrapping techniques to support the
soft tissue attachments have been useful in some when directed by a
skilled sports therapist. Being pain free for 7-10 days is recommended
before exercises are commenced. Individuals with pain at rest and who
are not responsive to treatment require continued evaluation for stress
fracture. Treatment of tibial stress fractures is similar but requires more
prolonged avoidance of running and jumping, usually 6-8 weeks.
Chronic compartment syndrome occurs in an athlete in a running sport, usually during a period of heavy training. It is caused by
muscle hypertrophy and increased intracompartmental pressure with
exercise. There is typically a pain-­free period of about 10 minutes at the
beginning of a workout before onset of constant throbbing pain that
is difficult to localize. It lasts for minutes to hours after exercise and is
relieved by ice and elevation. Classically, there is numbness of the foot
associated with high pressure within the corresponding muscle compartment. The most common compartment affected is the anterolateral
compartment with compression of the fibular nerve followed by the
deep posterior compartment. The physical examination in the office
is often normal, but weakness of the extensor hallucis longus (anterolateral compartment) and decreased sensation between the first and
second toe may be present. Symptoms may be elicited through exercise in or near the examination room (jogging in place, stair climbing,
etc.), and prompt evaluation after symptom onset may aid in diagnosis. Radiologic evaluation is typically negative and used primarily to
rule out other conditions. Compartment pressure measurements are
the test of choice. Treatment involves reduction of activity, antiinflammatory medication, orthotics (hyperpronation), heel cord stretching,
light strengthening of distal musculature, optimal footwear, and cross-­
training (swimming, cycling, and water jogging). Cryotherapy and
superficial heat can also be of help. Persistent systems, despite conservative care, may require fasciotomy.
Popliteal artery entrapment syndrome occurs when the popliteal
artery is compressed by the medial head of the gastrocnemius muscle
and the fascial band of the soleus with activity; the entrapment may be
anatomic or functional (from hypertrophy). Patients may have claudication and paresthesia (involvement of the tibial nerve), and calf
swelling (primary venous obstruction). Most patients have exertional
leg pain with no symptoms at rest; pain may be unilateral or bilateral
depending on the type of entrapment syndrome. The tibial or dorsalis pedis pulse may be reduced or absent with passive ankle dorsiflexion with the knee extended. Doppler exam in the neutral and flexion
position confirms the diagnosis in most patients; magnetic resonance

4311

angiography or CT angiography may be needed if the Doppler exam
is inconclusive. Surgical correction is the treatment of choice and
involves medical gastrocnemius fasciotomy, take down of the soleus
tibial attachments, and resection of the fibula soleus band. If the artery
is injured, it requires bypass surgery.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

728.8 Ankle Injuries
Gregory L. Landry and Andrew M. Watson
Ankle injuries are the most common acute athletic injury. Approximately 85% of ankle injuries are ankle sprains, and 85% of these are
inversion injuries (foot planted with the lateral fibula moving toward
the ground), 5% are eversion injuries (foot planted with the medial
malleolus moving toward the ground), and 10% are combined.

EXAMINATION AND INJURY GRADING SCALE

In obvious cases of fracture or dislocation, evaluating neurovascular
status with as little movement as possible is the initial priority. If no
deformity is obvious, the next step is inspection for edema, ecchymosis, and anatomic variants. Key sites to palpate for tenderness are the
entire length of the fibula; the medial malleolus; the base of the fifth
metatarsal; the anterior, medial, and lateral joint lines; the navicular;
and the Achilles tendon complex. Assessment of active range of motion
(patient alone) in dorsiflexion, plantar flexion, inversion, and eversion
along with gentle resisted range of motion can be helpful.
Provocative testing attempts to evaluate the integrity of the ligaments. In a patient with a markedly swollen, painful ankle, provocative
testing is difficult because of muscle spasm and involuntary guarding.
It is more useful on the field before much bleeding and edema have
occurred. The anterior drawer test assesses for anterior translation
of the talus and competence of the anterior talofibular ligament. The
inversion stress test examines the competence of the anterior talofibular and calcaneofibular ligaments (Fig. 728.13). In the acute setting, the
integrity of the tibiofibular ligaments and syndesmosis can be examined
by the syndesmosis squeeze test. Pain at the ankle joint with squeezing
the superior aspect of the lower leg implies injury to the interosseous
membrane and syndesmosis between the tibia and fibula—suspicious
for a high ankle sprain or more severe injury. Athletes with this injury
cannot bear any weight and have severe pain with dorsiflexion and
external rotation of the foot. Occasionally, the peroneal tendon dislocates from the fibular groove simultaneously with an ankle sprain. To
assess for peroneal tendon instability, the examiner applies pressure
from behind the peroneal tendon with resisted eversion and plantar

Fig. 728.13 Inversion stress tilt test for ankle instability. (From Hergenroeder AC. Diagnosis and treatment of ankle sprains: a review. Am
J Dis Child. 1990;144:809–814.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4312 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
flexion, and the tendon pops anteriorly. If either a significant syndesmotic injury or an acute peroneal dislocation is suspected, orthopedic
consultation should be sought.

RADIOGRAPHS

AP, lateral, and mortise views of the ankle are obtained when patients
have pain in the area of the malleoli, are unable to bear weight, or have
focal bone tenderness over the distal tibia or fibula. The Ottawa ankle
rules help define who requires radiographs (Fig. 728.14). A foot series
(AP, lateral, and oblique views) should be obtained when patients have
pain in the area of the midfoot or bone tenderness over the navicular
or fifth metatarsal, and/or an inability to bear weight. It is important
to differentiate an avulsion fracture of the fifth metatarsal base (dancer’s fracture) from the more distal Jones fracture of the proximal fifth
metatarsal (located about 2 cm distal to the proximal end). The former is treated like an ankle sprain; the latter fracture has an increased
risk of nonunion and requires orthopedic consultation. Injury to the
deltoid ligament of the medial ankle is rare but should raise the question of proximal fibular fracture. In this circumstance more proximal
tibial imaging may be necessary. A talar dome fracture may present
as an ankle sprain that does not improve. Radiographs on initial presentation can have subtle abnormalities. Any suspicion on the initial
radiographs of a talar dome fracture warrants orthopedic consultation
and further imaging. In the early adolescent, always look carefully at
the tibial epiphysis. Nondisplaced Salter III fractures can be subtle and
need to be recognized early and referred to an orthopedic surgeon
promptly. Diagnostic ultrasound, when available at the point of care,
can efficiently provide prognostic information by direct visualization of injured ligaments. Additionally, dynamic stress can be applied
during ligament visualization to assess for gaping of the joint, which
is indicative of more complete tearing with an increased duration of
expected recovery.

INITIAL TREATMENT OF ANKLE SPRAINS

Ankle sprains need to be treated with PRICE principles. This should be
followed for the first 48-72 hours after the injury to minimize bleeding
and edema. For an ankle injury, this may consist of crutches and an
elastic wrap, although other compression devices, such as an air stirrup
splint, are also effective. This allows early weight-­bearing with protection and can be removed for rehabilitation. It is important to start a
rehabilitation program as soon as possible.

Rehabilitation

Rehabilitation should begin the day of injury; for patients who have
pain with movement, isometric strengthening can be started. Early-­
phase intervention includes restoration of functional range of motion,
strengthening with emphasis on peroneal musculature, and early sensory proprioceptive training. Later intervention includes higher-­level
balance activities, advanced proprioception exercises, and endurance
training. When determining when an athlete is ready for running,
there must be full range of motion and nearly full strength compared
to the uninjured side. While standing on the uninjured side only, the
athlete is instructed to hop 8-10 times, if possible. When this can be
achieved without pain on the injured side, the athlete can begin to run,
starting out with jogging and gradually progressing in speed. The athlete must stop if there is significant pain or limp. Finally, before returning to sport, the athlete must be able to sprint and change directions off
the injured ankle comfortably. Performing some sport-­related tasks is
also helpful in determining readiness for return to play.
Recurrent ankle injuries are more likely in patients who have not
undergone complete rehabilitation. Ankle sprains are less likely in
players wearing high-­top shoes or lace-­up ankle braces. Proper taping of the ankle with adhesive tape can provide functional support but
loosens with use and is often unavailable. Surgery is a consideration for
chronic mechanical instability with lateral complex ligamentous laxity in the failure of more conservative care. Salter-­Harris grade I distal
fibular fractures need careful consideration, particularly in the child
younger than 12 years of age. The physeal plates are generally the weakest link in the musculoskeletal chain and tend to slide or pull apart
before the surrounding soft tissue and/or ligaments tear in this younger
population.

OTHER CAUSES OF ANKLE PAIN

Toddler’s fracture needs to be considered in young children with ankle
pain, especially in those younger than 6 years (see Chapter 724.4). The
proposed mechanism involves sheer stress with lack of displacement
because of the periosteum that is relatively strong compared to the elastic bone in younger children. Initial radiographs may be inconspicuous
(a faint spiral oblique line) or even normal. The condition can be mistaken for osteomyelitis, transient synovitis, or even child abuse. Toddler’s fracture usually occurs in the lower third of the tibia, whereas
nonaccidental injury typically affects the upper two-­thirds or midshaft
Medial view

Lateral view

Malleolar zone

A Posterior edge
or tip of lateral
malleolus-6 cm

B Posterior edge
or tip of medial
malleolus-6 cm

Mid-foot zone

C Base of fifth
metatarsal

A series of ankle x-ray films is required only if
there is any pain in malleolar zone and any of
these findings:
• Bone tenderness at A
• Bone tenderness at B
• Inability to bear weight both immediately and
in emergency department

D Navicular

A series of ankle x-ray films is required only if
there is any pain in mid-foot zone and any of
these findings:
• Bone tenderness at C
• Bone tenderness at D
• Inability to bear weight both immediately and
in emergency department

Fig. 728.14 Ottawa ankle rules. (From Bachmann LM, Kolb E, Koller MT, et al. Accuracy of Ottawa ankle rules to exclude fractures of the ankle and
mid-­foot; systematic review. BMJ. 2003;326:417–419.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 728 u Management of Musculoskeletal Injury
of the tibia. Other less common conditions that cannot be excluded
include os fibulare, a congenital unfused secondary ossification center
of the distal fibula. This can be seen in younger patients with recurrent
ankle sprains, particularly as their body weight and activity increase
during the early academic years. Undiagnosed tarsal coalitions can
also be seen in the presence of ankle sprains in younger children (most
commonly talocalcaneal and calcaneal navicular). Muscular strains
and/or tendinoses are more prevalent in the older child and adolescent, and include peroneal, posterior tibialis, and gastrocnemius/
Achilles types. Tarsal tunnel syndrome (entrapment of the posterior
tibial nerve) is more prevalent in the adolescent/younger adult and is
commonly associated with medial ankle pain and burning or tingling
into the sole of the foot.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for a complete
Bibliography.

728.9 Foot Injuries
Gregory L. Landry and Andrew M. Watson
Metatarsal stress fractures can occur in any running athlete. The history is often one of insidious pain with activity that is getting worse.
Examination reveals point tenderness over the mid-­shaft of the metatarsal, most commonly the second or third metatarsal. Radiographs
might not show the periosteal reaction before pain has been present for
2 weeks or more. Treatment is relative rest for 6-8 weeks. Shoes with
good arch supports reduce stress to the metatarsals.
Vague dorsal foot pain in an athlete in a running sport can represent a navicular stress fracture. Unlike other stress fractures, it might
not localize well on examination. If there is any tenderness around the
navicular, a stress fracture should be suspected. This stress fracture can
take many weeks to show up on plain radiographs, so MRI should be
done to confirm the diagnosis. Because this fracture is at high risk of
nonunion, immobilization and non–weight-­bearing for 8-12 weeks is
the usual treatment. A CT scan should be obtained to document full
healing after the period of immobilization.
Sever disease (calcaneal apophysitis) occurs at the insertion of
the Achilles tendon on the calcaneus and manifests as activity-­related
pain (see Fig. 728.3). It is more common in males, is often bilateral,
and usually occurs between ages 8 and 13 years. Tenderness is elicited
at the insertion of the Achilles tendon into the calcaneus, especially
with squeezing the heel (positive squeeze test). Sever disease is associated with tight Achilles tendons and mid-­foot hyperpronation that
puts more stress on the plantar flexors of the foot. Treatment includes
relative rest, ice, massage, stretching, and strengthening the Achilles
tendon. Correcting the mid-­foot hyperpronation with orthotics, arch
supports, or stabilizing shoe wear is important in most athletes with
Sever disease. If the foot is neutral or there is mild hyperpronation,
cushioned heel lifts can be helpful to unload the Achilles tendon and its
insertion. With optimal management, symptoms frequently improve
in 4-8 weeks. Generally, if there is no limp during the athletic activity,
young athletes with Sever disease should be allowed to play.
Plantar fasciitis is an overuse injury resulting in degeneration of
the plantar aponeurosis. Rare in prepubertal children, this diagnosis is
more likely seen in the adolescent or young adult. Athletes report heel
pain with activity that is worse with the first steps of the day or after
several hours of non–weight-­bearing. Tenderness is elicited on the
medial calcaneal tuberosity. Relative rest from weight-­bearing activity is helpful. Athletes get plantar fasciitis when shoes are worn with
inadequate arch supports. New shoes or use of semirigid arch supports
often lessen the pain. Stretching the calves and plantar fascia helps,
assisted at times with therapeutic ultrasound treatment. Some patients
benefit from night splints even though they can make sleep difficult.
As long as there is no limping with athletic activity, the athlete may
continue participation. Complete recovery is usually seen at 6 months.

4313

Corticosteroid injection, extracorporeal shock-­wave therapy, or injections of platelet-­rich plasma can be considered in those cases recalcitrant to conservative treatments.
Calcaneal stress fracture is seen in the older adolescent or young
adult involved in a running sport. There is heel pain with any weight-­
bearing activity. The physical examination reveals pain with squeezing
the calcaneus. Sclerosis can show up on the AP and lateral radiographs
after 2-3 weeks of pain. MRI may need to be performed to confirm the
diagnosis in some cases. The calcaneus is an uncommon location for a
stress fracture and is often associated with osteopenia. Treatment is rest
from running and other weight-­bearing activity for at least 8 weeks.
Immobilization is rarely necessary.
Pes planus, or “flat feet,” may be termed “flexible” or “rigid.” Flexible pes planus is usually asymptomatic and is the most common type
found in children (see Chapter 715.5). Foot orthotics may be helpful
for older children with foot pain or associated muscle cramping. Rigid
pes planus is a congenital deformity associated with other anomalies
in 50% of cases. It is caused by failure of the tarsal bones to separate,
leaving a bony cartilaginous or fibrous bridge or coalition between two
or more tarsal bones (see Chapter 715.6). Talocalcaneal coalitions are
more symptomatic between 12 and 16 years of age, whereas calcaneonavicular coalitions are more symptomatic between 8 and 12 years of
age. Symptoms are insidious with occasional acute arch, ankle, and
mid-­foot pain, which is at times brought on with sports-­related activities. The hindfoot often does not align in its normal varus position on
tiptoe maneuvers. Patients are predisposed to ankle sprains secondary
to limited subtalar motion, and stress to the subtalar and transverse
tarsal joints frequently causes pain. CT scans are diagnostic, and initial treatment is conservative with short leg casting and/or molded
orthoses and rest. In the case of failure of conservative care, surgical
intervention is usually necessary. Rigid cavus feet can also be associated with metatarsalgia, clawing, and intrinsic muscle atrophy, which
are all possible in the young athlete (see Chapter 715.7). With a cavus
foot, undiagnosed neurologic conditions, such a Charcot-­Marie-­Tooth
disease, spinal dysraphism, Friedrich ataxia, or spinal tumor, need to
be considered. Custom-­molded orthotics may be helpful, and family
history can be critical. Symptomatic, accessory navicular bones and
sesamoiditis can be considered when these areas are painful and do not
have evidence of fracture or prior trauma. These conditions are more
common in the adolescent or younger adult and can be exacerbated
with sporting activities.
Other conditions causing foot pain include Lisfranc sprain and/
or dislocation, which is more common in football linemen or other
athletes requiring heavy loading on the mid-­foot and forefoot joints,
and gymnasts using the balance beam. The Lisfranc joint is the tarsal
metatarsal articulation of the three cuneiform bones and the cuboid
with the five proximal metatarsals. Turf toe can be seen, particularly
in the older child and/or adolescent running on artificial or synthetic
surfaces. It results from hyperextension through the first metatarsal
phalangeal joint, spraining the ligaments surrounding the joint often
in a football and/or soccer activity.
Iselin apophysitis is an apophysitis that occurs at the tuberosity
of the fifth metatarsal. The apophysis at this site appears between
the ages of 9 and 14 years and is located within the insertion of
the peroneus brevis tendon. This condition can be a predisposing
factor to dancer’s fracture (see Chapter 728.8). Freiberg disease,
which involves the collapse of the articular service and subchondral
bone, usually of the second metatarsal, and Kohler disease, which
involves irregular ossification of the tarsal navicular joint with
localized pain and increased density, should always be considered
in the evaluation osteochondroses of the foot (see Chapter 715.8).
Freiberg disease is more common in girls between the ages of 12
and 15 years, whereas Kohler disease occurs in younger individuals,
age 2-9 years, and is frequently reversible with conservative care,
including orthoses and casting.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4314 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

Chapter 729

Sports-­Related Traumatic
Brain Injury (Concussion)
Alex M. Taylor, William P. Meehan III, and
Mark R. Proctor
Concussion is a form of traumatic brain injury (TBI) caused by sudden acceleration, deceleration, or rotational forces to the brain, which
can occur with a blow to the head, neck, face, or body. The resulting
pathophysiologic state is associated with a constellation of signs and
symptoms that, for sport-­related concussions (SRCs), typically self-­
resolve within 7-10 days. A minority of children can experience persistent postconcussion symptoms (PPCS) that extend beyond 28 days
and limit functional ability, cause social isolation, reduce school attendance and performance, and can lead to anxiety, mood alteration, and
lower quality of life. Accurate diagnosis and appropriate management
of concussion is needed to safely return children to school and sports
and to avoid the potential for worse outcomes.

DEFINITION/TERMINOLOGY

The spectrum of TBI ranges from mild to severe. Classification is typically determined by score on the Glasgow Coma Scale (see Chapter
79), with severe = <
−8, moderate = 9-12, and mild = 13-15. Although
concussion and mild TBI (mTBI) are sometimes used interchangeably, concussion may be best understood as the clinical syndrome that
is associated with mTBI. There are several agreed on features:
◆	Concussion may be caused by a direct blow to the head, face, neck,
or elsewhere on the body with an “impulsive” force transmitted to
the head.
◆	Concussion typically results in the rapid onset of short-­lived impairment of neurologic function that resolves spontaneously. However,
in some cases, signs and symptoms may evolve over minutes to
hours.
◆	Concussion may result in neuropathologic changes, but the acute
clinical signs and symptoms largely reflect a functional disturbance
rather than a structural injury and, as such, no abnormality is seen
on standard structural neuroimaging studies.
◆	Concussion results in a range of clinical signs and symptoms that
may or may not involve loss of consciousness (Fig. 729.1). Resolution of the clinical and cognitive features typically follows a sequential course. However, in some cases, symptoms may be prolonged.
To be defined as a concussion, the clinical signs and symptoms cannot
be explained by drug, alcohol, or medication use, other injuries (such as
cervical injuries, peripheral vestibular dysfunction), or other comorbidities (e.g., psychologic factors or coexisting medical conditions).

EPIDEMIOLOGOY

According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),
as many as 3.8 million sport-­related TBIs may occur in the United
States annually with 70–90% of these injuries classified as concussion.
One study suggested that current surveillance systems may capture
only one out of every nine concussions.
Approximately 20% of middle and high school children report a lifetime prevalence of concussion. Sports participation is the most common mechanism of injury. An estimated 1.1-1.9 million recreational
and sports-­related concussions occur each year in children 18 years or
younger. In gender comparable sports, female athletes report higher
rates of concussion than males, and both groups are more likely to suffer a concussion in competition than at practice. Among males, the
incidence of concussion is highest in collision (contact) sports, including rugby, American football, ice hockey, lacrosse, basketball, soccer,
and wrestling. Among females, the incidence of concussion is highest

in soccer, lacrosse, and field hockey. Other sports and recreational
activities in which concussions frequently occur include bicycling,
skateboarding, skiing, and snowboarding. Younger children may have
playground-­associated concussions.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

The constellation of symptoms associated with concussion are not
caused by observable structural injury or hemorrhage; clinical imaging
studies (MRI/CT) typically are normal. However, there is a proposed
cascade of events that lead to the clinical syndrome. A sudden acceleration, deceleration, or rotation of the brain is thought to result in
parenchymal shear stress and strain that disrupts neuronal function in
a cascade of ionic and metabolic fluctuations. Affected neurons experience massive depolarization and then require additional adenosine
triphosphate (ATP) to restore cellular homeostasis. Glucose levels
dramatically increase to fuel ATP production, which ultimately causes
lactic acid accumulation. At the same time this process occurs, there is
a decrease in cerebral blood flow, which may persist for several weeks.
Consequently, less glucose is available when it is most needed to fuel
ATP for ionic recovery. The signs and symptoms of concussion are
thought to reflect the energy crisis or mismatch between the demand
and availability of fuel in the brain after trauma.

SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS

Signs and symptoms of concussion can be classified into five categories,
including somatic, vestibular, cognitive, emotional, and sleep related
(Table 729.1). Acutely, headache is the most commonly reported
symptom, followed by dizziness, difficulty concentrating, and confusion. Sleep disturbance, anxiety, and mood-­related symptoms are more
likely to occur several weeks post-­injury. Brief loss of consciousness
occurs in less than 5% of SRCs and is not associated with injury severity or time to recover. The most reliable predictor of recovery is initial
symptom burden; children who experience greater symptom load and
severity are at increased risk of PPCS. However, several noninjury–
related factors can also affect recovery, including female sex, history of
migraines, history of prior concussion, poorer preinjury child adjustment, family dysfunction, neurodevelopmental disorder (e.g., learning
disability, attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder [ADHD]), and psychiatric illness (e.g., anxiety, depression).
Although concussion typically results in an immediate onset of short-­
lived neurologic dysfunction that resolves spontaneously, signs and
symptoms may develop over several minutes to hours. The diagnosis can
be challenging and further complicated by the presence of concussion-­
like symptoms in noninjured athletes. Children with preexisting neurodevelopmental disorders, mental health concerns, history of prior
concussion, or headaches/migraines may endorse concussion-­like symptoms in the absence of injury. A reasonable mechanism of injury needs
to be identified as well as a measurable change from baseline symptoms.
To this end, age-­appropriate symptom scales or checklists may be useful
in assessing SRC and monitoring recovery (Table 729.1). Many symptom rating scales are available, and some are incorporated into sideline
assessment tools, including the Sport Concussion Assessment Tool version 6 (SCAT6), which is approved for age 13 years and older. It is important to use a developmentally appropriate scale for younger children
(e.g., Child-­SCAT6 for children age 5-12 years) and to use the same tool
in subsequent assessments to allow for tracking of symptoms over time.

INITIAL ASSESSMENT AND TOOLS

The initial diagnosis and management of concussion often begins on
the field, rink, or court. Whether on the sideline and/or at a medical
clinic, the first step is to rule out an injury that requires immediate
attention. Acute care should include cervical spine stabilization, evaluation of airway, breathing, and circulation, and motor and sensory
neurologic testing. Once a spinal cord injury or more severe injury to
the brain is ruled out, it is important to: (1) perform a detailed evaluation of the athlete’s mental status, (2) assess signs and symptoms, and
(3) identify risks for delayed recovery (i.e., neurodevelopmental disorders, mental health concerns, history of prior concussion, or headaches/migraines). This process is facilitated by use of a validated sideline

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 729 u Sports-­Related Traumatic Brain Injury (Concussion) 4315

xacerbation of prefor e
exis
r
o
tin
nit
o
gc
M
Vestibular
on
di
tio
Physical exam
Impaired balance/gait
ns
Abnormal vestibular-ocular reflex
,
Targeted treatment
Graded exposure to stimuli
Vestibular rehabilitation

Ocular

Cognitive

Physical exam
Abnormal near point convergence
Impaired accommodation
Abnormal pursuits
Abnormal saccades
Symptom provocation with above tests

Physical exam
Normal
Confusion
Disorientation
Poor performance on in-office cognitive testing

Balance problems

Feeling like “in a fog”

Dizziness

Targeted treatment
Ocular rehabilitation
Lens changes

Difficulty
remembering
Blurred vision

“Don’t feel right”
Nausea or vomiting
Concussion symptoms

Targeted treatment
Academic modifications
Formal neurocognitive
evaluation/rehabilitation

Difficulty concentrating
Confusion

from SCAT symptom evaluation

Sensitivity to light

Feeling slowed down
Headache
Nervous or anxious

Fatigue or low energy

Neck pain
Drowsiness

Headache-migraine

Sensitivity
to noise

Fatigue
Irritability
Trouble falling asleep

“Pressure in head”

Sadness
More emotional

Targeted treatment
Manual therapy
Treatment of HA disorder

ic
ob
r
ae

Anxiety-Mood

Physical exam
Normal
Tired of subdued appearance
Decreased arousal
somnolence
Targeted treatment
Cognitive behavioral therapy
Graded exertional tolerance
training in chronic setting

d

Physical exam
Normal
Agitated
Anxious
Flat affect
Tearful
Targeted treatment
Maintain social engagement
Mental health counseling
Cognitive behavioral therapy

,
iene
hyg
ep
sle

se
rci
e
ex

Physical exam
Normal
Avoidance reaction to bright light
Occipital tenderness
Neck tenderness
Tight neck muscles

arding ex
p
e
c
t
nsel reg
a
tion
Cou
o
f
r
ec
o
v
er
y,

Genera
l rec
om
me
nd
ati
on
s:

Abnormal visual motion sensitivity
or other abnormal vestibular testing

subsy
m
pto
m

th
re
s
h
ol

Fig. 729.1 Constellation of symptoms after concussion. Overlapping clinical domains to monitor and facilitate individualized management after

concussion. (From Harmon KG, Clugston JR, Dec K, et al. American Medical Society for Sports Medicine position statement on concussion in sport.
Br J Sports Med. 2019;53[4]:213–225.)

assessment tool. SCAT6 is recommended and includes standardized
methods for recording relevant demographics, observable signs of
injury, postconcussion symptoms, and memory function (excluding
children <12 years), as well as the GCS, cervical spine assessment,
brief neurologic exam, and the modified Balance Error Scoring System (m-­BESS). Another often-­used sideline assessment is the Sideline
Assessment of Concussion, which includes a mental status exam, brief
neurologic exam, and cognitive screen.
The Balance Error Scoring System (BESS) measures postural stability or balance and consists of six stances, three on a firm surface and the
same three stances on an unstable (medium density foam) surface. The
modified BESS (m-­BESS) is frequently used because it does not rely on
availability of medium-­density foam for administration. Both include
three stances: feet shoulder width apart, a tandem stance (one foot in

front of the other), and a single-­leg stance on the person’s nondominant
leg, which are performed for 20 seconds with eyes closed and hands on
the iliac crests. An error is recorded each time athletes lift their hands
off their hips, open their eyes, step, stumble, fall, remain out of the test
position for more than 5 seconds, move hips into more than 30 degrees
of flexion or abduction, or lift their forefoot or heel. Normative data are
available for comparison, although preseason balance screening provides more precise, individualized data. Furthermore, most evidence
suggests that balance impairments generally resolve within 3 days
postinjury.
Clinicians should screen for vision problems after concussion. In
addition to visual acuity and visual field testing, the Vestibular Ocular
Motor Screening Assessment (VOMS) is another tool that is increasingly used to evaluate concussion. It involves a standardized method to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4316 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 729.1  Postconcussion Symptom Scale
NONE

MILD

Headache

0

1

2

MODERATE
3

4

SEVERE
5

6

“Pressure in head”

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Neck pain

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Nausea or vomiting

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Dizziness

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Blurred vision

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Balance problems

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Sensitivity to light

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Sensitivity to noise

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Feeling slowed down

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Feeling like “in a
fog”

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

“Don’t feel right”

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Difficulty
concentrating

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Difficulty
remembering

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Fatigue or low
energy

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Confusion

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Drowsiness

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

More emotional

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Irritability

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Sadness

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Nervous or anxious

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Trouble falling asleep

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

From Echemendia RJ, Meeuwisse W, McCrory P, et al. Sport concussion assessment
tool—5th edition. Br J Sports Med. 2017;51:851–858.

assess smooth pursuits, horizontal and vertical saccades, convergence,
horizontal vestibular ocular reflex, and visual motion sensitivity. Findings on the VOMS have been shown to distinguish children with concussion from uninjured controls, and vestibular-­ocular dysfunction
may have a particularly deleterious effect on academics.
Neuropsychologic assessment quantifies cognitive symptoms of
concussion and can help to identify comorbidities that can complicate the diagnosis. The areas identified as most vulnerable to injury
include attention and executive function (e.g., speed of processing),
new learning and memory, and reaction time. Obtaining preseason
or “baseline” data enables clinicians to accurately detect cognitive
impairment after injury and aids interpretation of data for athletes
with preexisting or contextual factors that affect cognitive function
(e.g., neurodevelopmental disorder, sleep, anxiety, and depression).
Computer-­administered neurocognitive tests are frequently used
because the cost and availability of trained neuropsychologists to
administer and interpret more comprehensive tests are prohibitive. Further, testing may be of additional benefit in determining
appropriate school and home interventions for children who go on
to experience PPCS.
The application of neuropsychologic assessment varies depending
on the time of referral. Research generally supports the use of brief cognitive screens acutely (∼3 days postinjury) such as those incorporated

into the SCAT and SAC. Computerized administered neurocognitive
assessment or a hybrid approach that includes paper and pencil measures of function are most often administered subacutely (∼4-30 days
postinjury) to assist in return-to-play decision-­making, documenting
lingering cognitive deficits, and providing rationale for academic supports or accommodations. The purpose of neuropsychologic assessment for patients with prolonged or chronic postconcussion symptoms
(30+ days) is to provide the referring clinician and patient with additional insight into injury and noninjury factors affecting recovery, as
well as their impact on cognitive function. Symptoms of comorbidities,
including sleep deprivation, deconditioning, and pain, closely resemble
postconcussion symptoms and similarly influence health-­related status and cognition. Research also indicates that anxiety and depression,
family functioning, and caregiver adjustment, as well as neurodevelopmental disorders (e.g., learning disability or ADHD) are strong predictors of prolonged symptoms.
In addition to ruling out more severe injury, the primary goal of
both sideline assessment and/or office-­based assessment is to prevent
concussed athletes from returning to play prematurely. The brain is
likely more vulnerable to reinjury immediately after concussion and
until ionic and metabolic functioning normalizes. Consistent with this,
most reinjuries occur within the first 10 days of an initial concussion.
Thus, if a concussion is suspected, it is often wise to remove younger
athletes from play for 24 hours or until the diagnosis of concussion
can be confidently ruled out. Athletes who experience prolonged loss
of consciousness, focal neurologic deficits, excessive somnolence,
progressively worsening headache pain, repeated vomiting, slurred
speech, and significant confusion may need to be seen in the emergency department where brain imaging can be conducted to rule out
more severe head injury.
A blood test (Brain Trauma Indicator) is FDA approved for patients
≥18 years of age with concussion who have normal mental status) to
help identify patients in need of cranial imaging. The test measures brain
proteins, glial fibrillary acid protein, and ubiquitin C-­terminal hydroclase-1, and may also be useful in detecting concussion in children.

MANAGEMENT

After diagnosis and removal from play, the initial management strategy is education of the child and parents about concussion, including
the signs and symptoms, effects on cognition, and expected trajectory of recovery. Early limited, subsymptom levels of physical activity may improve recovery, whereas complete rest beyond 2-3 days is
associated with delayed recovery. Children (symptomatic or asymptomatic) who can tolerate light exercise soon after injury should be
encouraged to do so because it prevents deconditioning and can help
with sleep and mood regulation. Importantly, early moderate and
intense exercise is associated with symptom exacerbation and longer
recovery times, and exercise of any intensity is deferred if it provokes
symptoms in the first few days postinjury. Most children will begin
to achieve some level of activity tolerance within 2-3 days. Management plans should then focus on gradually and progressively resuming noncontact, low-­risk physical activity until full recovery (Table
729.2).
Most children who sustain a concussion will experience full recovery with adherence to relative rest, followed by graduated return to
physical and cognitive activity. Nonetheless, some athletes require
targeted symptom management, particularly when they are slow to
improve (Table 729.3; see Fig. 729.1). Acetaminophen or NSAIDs
may help to reduce acute headache pain. Prescription medications
are sometimes warranted, including topiramate, amitriptyline, or
cyproheptadine for posttraumatic headaches, peripheral nerve
blocks for occipital or cervicogenic headaches, and gabapentin for
headaches with a neuropathic component. Otolaryngology referral
or vestibular therapy is recommended for management of dizziness,
vertigo, and imbalance. For children with visual disturbance, assessment and visual rehabilitation therapy managed by an optometrist
or ophthalmologist is appropriate. Psychologic assessment and intervention, particularly cognitive behavioral therapy, is recommended

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 729 u Sports-­Related Traumatic Brain Injury (Concussion) 4317
Table 729.2  Graduated Return to Play Protocol
STAGE

AIM

ACTIVITY

GOAL OF EACH STEP

1

Symptom-­limited activity

Daily activities that do not provoke
symptoms

Gradual reintroduction of work/school
activities

2

Light aerobic exercise

Walking or stationary cycling at slow to
medium pace. No resistance training

Increase heart rate

3

Sport-­specific exercise

Running or skating drills. No head impact
activities

Add movement

4

Noncontact training drills

Harder training drills (e.g., passing drills).
May start progressive resistance training

Exercise, coordination, and increased
thinking

5

Full contact practice

After medical clearance, participate in
normal training activities

Restore confidence and assess
functional skills by coaching staff

6

Return to sport

Normal game play

NOTE: An initial period of 24-48 hr of both relative physical rest and cognitive rest is recommended before beginning the return to sport progression.
There should be at least 24 hr (or longer) for each step of the progression. If any symptoms worsen during exercise, the athlete should go back to the previous step. Resistance
training should be added only in the later stages (stage 3 or 4 at the earliest). If symptoms are persistent (e.g., more than 10-14 days in adults or more than 1 mo in children), the
athlete should be referred to a healthcare professional who is an expert in the management of concussion.
From Patricios JS, Schneider KJ, Dvorak J, et al. Consensus statement on concussion in sport: the 6th International Conference on Concussion in Sport–Amsterdam, Oct 2022. Br J
Sports Med. 2023;57:695.

Table 729.3  Common Potential Interventions for Specific
Symptoms After Pediatric Concussion
SPECIFIC SYMPTOMS

POTENTIAL INTERVENTIONS

Headache

Lifestyle modifications (water
intake, meal schedule, sleep,
and exercise), cervicovestibular
therapy, acute medications,
preventive medications, and
avoiding overuse of acute
medications

Light-Headedness or Exercise
Intolerance

Increase water and salt intake
and gradual increase in
exercise

Dizziness or Neck Pain

Vestibular therapy and cervical
spine therapy

Balance or Coordination
Difficulties

Neuromuscular training

Sleep Difficulties

Lifestyle modifications (bedtime
routine, white noise, avoid
caffeine, and exercise earlier),
and melatonin

Anxiety or Mood Problems

Counselling, antidepressants,
and anxiolytics

Cognitive Difficulties

Cognitive testing and academic
accommodations

From Beauchamp MH, Degeilh F, Rose SC: Improving outcome after paediatric concussion: challenges and possibilities. Lancet Child Adolesc 2023;7:728-738 (Panel 2, p. 733).

for athletes who experience worsening or newly developed symptoms of anxiety or depression. Both are potentially heightened as a
direct consequence of concussion as well as the resulting limitations
on everyday activities and social interaction. A multidisciplinary and
collaborative approach to target specific treatments is advised for
children whose symptoms do not show improvement with standard
behavioral interventions.

Return to School

Of particular importance to children and their families is the effect
of concussion on cognitive function and school performance.

Children and adolescents exposed to greater levels of cognitive
stress endorse worse symptoms and experience longer recovery
after concussion. Students who experience postconcussion symptoms report difficulty in school. There is also evidence that overly
restricting cognitive exertion and school participation can delay
recovery. Current recommendations focus on using self-­reported
symptoms to determine school readiness, followed by increasing exposure to classroom learning, tests, and assignments (Table
729.3). In general, children and adolescents are encouraged to
attend school, even if on a modified schedule, in 2-3 days or sooner,
with a program of academic adjustments and modifications that
allow for ongoing learning to occur with minimal symptom provocation. Clinicians should provide documentation to schoolteachers and administrators requesting compressed assignments, more
time to complete tests or assignments, deferred examinations, rest
breaks, audiobooks, oral teaching, large font printed material, or
preprinted notes where indicated.

Return to Play

There is a six-­stage return-­to-­play (RTP) protocol for a safe return
to activities (see Table 729.2). Starting with physical rest, athletes are
progressed to light aerobic exercise, moderate levels of sport-­specific
exercise, noncontact training drills, full contact practice, and normal game play. Athletes should be completely asymptomatic, free of
medications used to treat concussion symptoms, at full school, and
back to baseline functioning on all domains tested before the injury
before returning to contact or collision sports. Children and adolescents should remain at each stage of rehabilitation for no less than
24 hours before advancing to the next level. Thus a minimum of 5
days should pass before consideration of full return to competition. If
symptoms return at any stage of exertion, the athlete should rest until
the symptoms resolve and then return to the previous level of exertion. The final decision for RTP should be made by a licensed clinical provider with experience in the evaluation and management of
sports-­related concussions. Note that some states or schools require
an extended minimum number of symptom-­free days before RTP,
so clinicians need to be aware of the laws or local recommendations
regarding RTP.

Risks for Persistent Postconcussion Symptoms

From 80–90% of children and adolescents diagnosed with concussion will clinically recover within 4 weeks. Factors associated with
prolonged recovery include a history of prior concussions, female

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4318 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 729.4  Graduated Return to School Strategy
STAGE

AIM

ACTIVITY

GOAL OF EACH STEP

1

Daily activities at home that do
not give the child symptoms

Typical activities of the child during the day as long Gradual return to typical activities
as they do not increase symptoms (e.g., reading,
texting, screen time). Start with 5-15 min at a time
and gradually build up

2

School activities

Homework, reading, or other cognitive activities
outside of the classroom

Increase tolerance to cognitive
work

3

Return to school part-­time

Gradual introduction of schoolwork. May need to
start with a partial school day or with increased
breaks during the day

Increase academic activities

4

Return to school full time

Gradually progress school activities until a full day
can be tolerated

Return to full academic activities
and catch up on missed work

From Patricios JS, Schneider KJ, Dvorak J, et al. Consensus statement on concussion in sport: the 6th International Conference on Concussion in Sport–Amsterdam, Oct 2022. Br J
Sports Med. 2023;57:695.

sex, history of migraines, neurodevelopmental disorder (e.g.,
ADHD, learning disability), successive concussion soon after recovery, and acute symptom severity and burden. Female sex and initial
symptom severity are the factors associated with more persistent
symptoms in adolescents.

Chapter 730

Cervical Spine Injuries
Julie M. Kerr and Joseph A. Congeni

Retiring Young Athletes

Retirement from contact sports is rare but sometimes indicated,
even in younger athletes. Indications for retirement include chronic
neuropsychologic deficit, increased recovery times for successive
injuries, decreased threshold for repeat concussions, and multiple
concussions over the course of an athletic career.

COMPLICATIONS/LONG-­TERM EFFECTS

Second impact syndrome, seen more frequently in younger athletes than adults, refers to a rare, catastrophic neurologic injury
involving diffuse cerebral swelling that purportedly occurs in athletes who sustain a second head injury before full recovery from a
concussion. Although second impact syndrome is rare, its occurrence highlights the importance of removing children with concussion from play and other activities that place them at increased risk
of head injury until fully recovered. Pathogenic variants in CACNA1A have been associated with delayed and severe cerebral edema
after minor head trauma.
Some literature suggests that young athletes who suffer repetitive
head impacts and multiple concussions may be at risk for neurodegenerative diseases, such as chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE)
or Alzheimer disease. CTE describes pathologic changes in the brain
observed postmortem, which are hypothesized to be associated with
changes in mood, behavior, and cognition function. At present, there is
no way to diagnose CTE in living persons and its incidence and prevalence are unknown.

PREVENTION

The strongest evidence for concussion prevention is in support of
concussion education initiatives, age limits on contact, fair play, and
adherence to rules of the game or competition. Additionally, there
is some evidence that neck strengthening may reduce the risk of
concussion. Current research shows no proven benefit to personal
protective equipment (i.e., helmets, mouthguards) or dietary supplements in reducing the risk of concussion or its severity, although
it is important for athletes to wear properly fitted sport specific protective equipment to prevent more serious head injury and maxillofacial and dental trauma.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Sports participation has surpassed motor vehicle crashes as the number
one cause of cervical spine injuries (primarily involving soft tissue) in
youth older than 8 years of age. American football, hockey, wrestling,
and gymnastics have the highest incidence in the United States; internationally, rugby is nearly as high. Catastrophic cervical spine injuries
fortunately are rare but can occur as a result of the scrum or tackling in
rugby and tackling plays in American football.
The normal cervical spine has a lordotic curve, allowing it to absorb
shock and dissipate force with application of an axial force. When
the neck is flexed forward, the spine straightens, losing this shock-­
absorbing property. An axial load to the top of the head in this flexed
position transmits force through the spine.

SOFT TISSUE INJURY

The most frequent injury resulting from trauma to the head and neck
involves the muscles, tendons, and ligamentous structures. Even though
strains, sprains, and contusions are common and are managed with cervical, scapulothoracic, and shoulder-­strengthening exercises, thorough
evaluation is required to rule out more serious injuries. Even without bony
abnormalities, the cervical spine may become unstable secondary to soft
tissue injury.
Spinal laxity results when most restraining ligaments are injured. When
compared with adjacent vertebra, laxity should horizontally be less than 3.5
mm and angular displacement less than 11 degrees on plain flexion/extension films. However, younger athletes have more baseline laxity, making
the criteria less applicable, and muscle spasm can acutely mask instability.
If subluxation is remotely suspected, a hard cervical collar should be placed
and flexion/extension views obtained again at 2-4 weeks when inflammation and spasm have subsided. A loss of lordosis on lateral x-­ray is associated with significant weakness of cervical muscles, particularly the cervical
extensors. Disk injuries are rare in pediatric patients. Rupture or herniation
must be considered in any cervical pain differential (see Chapter 81).

SPEAR TACKLER’S SPINE

This clinical entity is characterized by progressive spinal changes secondary to incorrect tackling form. Findings on plain x-­ray consist of (1)
narrowing of cervical spinal canal, (2) loss or reversal of normal cervical
lordosis, and (3) preexisting minor posttraumatic x-­ray evidence of bony

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 730 u Cervical Spine Injuries
or ligamentous injury. Although rule changes in collision and contact
sports have limited the practice of contacting an opponent with a “head-­
down” neck position, this condition persists. Most experts argue that this
condition disqualifies athletes from return to play.

CERVICAL FRACTURES

All significant neck injuries should be treated seriously until cleared with
appropriate examination and imaging. Although many cervical fractures
are stable, improper management or inadequate evaluation could produce
catastrophic results. Until formally evaluated, the patient should be immobilized and treated as if the patient has an unstable cervical fracture (see
Chapter 81).

STINGERS (BURNERS)

Stingers are unilateral (never bilateral) peripheral nerve injuries occurring at an anatomic location between the cervical nerve root and the
brachial plexus. Three proposed mechanisms include traction or tensile
stretch injury, compressive injury, and direct trauma. A typical presentation is a transient episode of unilateral burning pain, with or without
numbness, that radiates from the shoulder, down the upper arm, and
into the hand. Symptoms of C5 and C6 root injury with deltoid and
biceps weakness are the most common presentation. These symptoms
may last for several minutes to days but do not result in permanent
neurologic deficit or abnormal imaging evaluations. Examination
should assess for weakness, especially shoulder abduction, external
rotation, and elbow flexion. The cervical spine should have full and
pain-­free range of motion and no tenderness to palpation.
The Spurling Compression test helps to assess for cervical radiculopathy as a cause of upper extremity pain. The patient is seated with their
neck tilted to the affected side. In a positive test, the pain is reproduced
with gentle axial compression. The test has high specificity (∼93%) but
relatively low sensitivity (∼30%), meaning that positive tests indicate
likely cervical radiculopathy but many patients with cervical radiculopathy will not have a positive test.
Return to play may be considered the same day if the exam is reassuring. This requires complete resolution of symptoms, full range of motion,
and normal strength. Multiple stingers, bilateral symptoms, or symptoms
persisting for longer than one hour should prompt further evaluation
with cervical spine radiographs and other imaging modalities as indicated
before resumption of any physical activities.

BURNING HANDS SYNDROME

The athlete with this syndrome presents with intense paresthesia and
associated hand and arm weakness in both upper extremities. This is
suggestive of a central cord syndrome with cord compression of the
spinothalamic and corticospinal tracts. As with stingers, most of these
episodes resolve in minutes to days. Persistent symptoms or repeated
episodes warrant further evaluation and imaging.

Table 730.1  Return to Play
NO CONTRAINDICATION TO RTP
Healed fractures
Healed C1 or C2 fracture with normal cervical
spine ROM
Healed subaxial fracture without sagittal
plane deformity
Asymptomatic clay-­shoveler’s (C7) spinous
process avulsion fracture
Congenital
conditions

Klippel-­Feil (single-­level anomaly not C0/C1
articulation)
Spina bifida occulta

Degenerative/
postsurgical
conditions

Cervical disk disease (no change in baseline
neurologic status)
Single-­level ACF with/without
instrumentation
Single-­or multiple-­level posterior cervical
laminotomy

Recurrent stingers

Fewer than three episodes lasting <24 hours
Must have full cervical range of motion
No persisting neurologic deficit

Transient
quadriparesis

Single episode
Full cervical range of motion
Normal neurologic exam
No radiologic instability
Normal spinal reserve (as evidenced on MRI)

RELATIVE CONTRAINDICATION TO RTP
Stingers/burners
Prolonged symptomatic burner/stinger
Three or more stingers
Transient
quadriparesis

Transient quadriparesis lasting >24 hours
More than 1 episode with symptoms of any
duration

Postsurgical

Healed two-­level ACF
PCF with/without instrumentation

ABSOLUTE CONTRAINDICATION TO RTP
Transient
Cervical myelopathy
quadriparesis and
Continued neck discomfort
any one or more of Reduced ROM
Neurologic deficit from baseline after injury
Surgical procedures

C1 + C2 fusion
Cervical laminectomy
Three-­level ACF or PCF

Soft tissue injuries

Asymptomatic ligamentous laxity (>11
degrees of kyphotic deformity)
C1 + C2 hypermobility with anterior dens
>3.5 mm (adult), >4 mm (child), i.e., Down
syndrome
Symptomatic cervical disk herniation

Other conditions

Spear tackler’s spine
Multilevel Klippel-­Feil anomaly (see Chapter
721.2)
Healed subaxial fracture with sagittal
kyphosis, coronal plane abnormality, or cord
encroachment
Ankylosing spondylitis
Rheumatoid arthritis with spinal abnormalities
Spinal cord abnormality (cord edema,
compression, etc.)
Arnold-­Chiari syndrome
Basilar invagination
Occipital-­C1 assimilation (occipitalization or
connection)
Spinal stenosis (canal width <13 mm between
C3 and C7)

TRANSIENT QUADRIPARESIS

Transient quadriparesis is a temporary neurologic episode encompassing sensory symptoms with or without motor changes. Transient
quadriparesis is also known as cervical cord neurapraxia, commotio
spinalis, and spinal cord concussion. Transient quadriparesis can be
divided into three types: plegia (complete loss of motor function),
paresis (motor weakness), and paresthesia (sensory symptoms only).
There is also a three-­part grading system: grade 1 symptoms lasting less
than 15 minutes, grade 2 symptoms lasting 15 minutes to 24 hours, and
grade 3 symptoms persisting beyond 24 hours. Transient quadriparesis
must be differentiated from a stinger, and the player should be removed
from activity and spinal cord injury considered.
Mechanisms of injury include hyperextension, hyperflexion, and
axial loading. Anatomically, when the neck is hyperflexed or hyperextended, the spinal canal is narrowed by up to 30%, increasing the
likelihood of cord injury.
Evaluation should start with plain flexion and extension films if
stable. CT should be used if cervical fracture is suspected. MRI should
then be used to evaluate for intrinsic spinal cord abnormalities or
ongoing cord or root compression.

4319

ACF, Anterior cervical fusion; PCF, posterior cervical fusion; ROM, range of motion; RTP,
return to play.
Adapted from Cantu R, Li YM, Abdulhamid M, et al. Return to play after cervical spine
injury in sports. Curr Sports Med Rep. 2013;12:14–17.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4320 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

Chapter 731

Heat Injuries
Gregory L. Landry and Andrew M. Watson

Fig. 730.1 An MRI (sagittal) demonstrating spinal cord contusion

(edema in central portion of spinal cord). (From Krabak BJ, Kanarek SL.
Cervical spine pain in the competitive athlete. Phys Med Rehabil Clin N
Am. 2011;22:459–471. Fig. 2).

Return to play for transient quadriparesis is heavily debated and
lacks data to guide decision-­making. Some experts argue that one episode is a contraindication to return to contact sports, whereas others
agree with using the Return to Play Table (Table 730.1) for absolute and
relative contraindications for return. If allowed to return to play and a
second episode of transient quadriparesis occurs, the complete workup
must be repeated.

CONGENITAL SPINAL STENOSIS

Developmental narrowing of the cervical spinal canal predisposes an
athlete to higher risk of spinal cord injury. This condition can be found
incidentally while working up other conditions. Currently, the “gold
standard” imaging modality is an MRI measuring a canal width of <13
mm between C3 and C7 to define stenosis, with “normal” being greater
than 15 mm.
Functional stenosis can be seen with dynamic MRI in flexion and
extension to determine whether the canal space decreases with movement. The positioning of the canal in flexion or extension causes narrowing from movement of the vertebra and ligament, respectively. The
measured diameter may be irrelevant if disk protrusion or ligament
hypertrophy causes compression. This narrow “reserve space” around
the spinal cord puts the athlete at greater risk for injury as compared
with the same force applied to a normal spine.

SPINAL CORD INJURY

Spinal cord injury is the most devastating complication of cervical
trauma. Hemorrhage and transection are considered irreversible and
associated with complete cord injury, whereas contusion and edema
are considered to have more potential for recovery (Fig. 730.1). These
severe injuries should be managed by providers with expertise in this
area.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Heat illness is among the leading causes of death in U.S. high school
athletes. It is a continuum of clinical signs and symptoms that can be
mild (heat stress) to fatal (heat stroke). Children are more vulnerable to
heat illness than adults because they have a greater ratio of surface area
to body mass and produce greater heat per kilogram of body weight
during activity. The sweat rate is lower in children, and the temperature at which sweating occurs is higher. Although there is considerable
interindividual variability, children can take longer to acclimatize to
warmer, more humid environments (typically 8-12 near-­consecutive
days of 30-­to 45-­minute exposures). Children also have a blunted
thirst response compared with adults and might not consume enough
fluid during exercise in hot, humid environments to prevent dehydration. In addition, certain medications may predispose to heat-­related
injury (Table 731.1).
Three major categories for heat illness are generally used: heat
cramps, heat exhaustion, and heat stroke (Table 731.2). However,
symptoms of heat illness overlap and progress as the core temperature rises. Heat cramps are the most common heat injury and
usually occur in mild dehydration and/or salt depletion, typically
affecting the calf and hamstring muscles. They tend to occur later
in activity, as muscle fatigue is reached and water loss and sodium
loss worsen. Heat cramps will normally respond to oral rehydration
with electrolyte solution and with gentle stretching. The athlete can
return to play when the ability to perform is not impaired. Other
minor heat illnesses include heat syncope, heat edema, and heat
tetany. Heat syncope is fainting after prolonged exercise, attributed to poor vasomotor tone and depleted intravascular volume; it
responds to fluids, cooling, and supine positioning. Heat edema is
mild edema of the hands and feet during initial exposure to heat; it
resolves with acclimatization. Heat tetany is carpopedal tingling or
spasms caused by heat-­related hyperventilation during short periods of exposure to intense heat. It responds to moving to a cooler
environment and decreasing respiratory rate (or rebreathing by
breathing into a bag).
Heat exhaustion is a moderate illness with a core temperature of
37.7–40°C (100–104°F). It is manifested as weakness, fatigue, headache, nausea, vomiting, dizziness, orthostasis, piloerection, and possibly syncope. Central nervous system dysfunction is mild, if present.
Treatment includes moving to a cool environment, cooling the body
with fans, removing excess clothing, and placing ice over the groin and
axillae. If a patient is not able to tolerate oral rehydration, IV fluids are
indicated. Patients should be monitored, including rectal temperature,
for signs of heat stroke. If rapid improvement is not achieved, transport
to an emergency facility is recommended.
Heat stroke is a severe illness manifested by central nervous system
disturbances and potential tissue damage. It is a medical emergency;
the mortality rate is up to 50%. Sports-­related heat stroke is characterized by profuse sweating and is related to intense exertion, whereas
“classic” heatstroke with dry, hot skin is of slower onset (days) in
elderly or chronically ill persons. Rectal temperature is usually >40°C
(104°F). Significant damage to the heart, brain, liver, kidneys, and
muscle occurs, with possible fatal consequences if untreated. Treatment is immediate whole-­body cooling via cold water immersion
(Table 731.3). Airway, breathing, circulation, core temperature, and
central nervous system status should be monitored constantly. Rapid
cooling should be ceased when core temperature is approximately
38.3–38.9°C (101–102°F). IV fluid at a rate of 800 mL/m2 in the
first hour with normal saline or lactated Ringer solution improves

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 731 u Heat Injuries
Table 731.1  Medications and Drugs That May Increase
the Risk of Heat-Related Injury
MEDICATIONS
Anticholinergic agents (including antihistamines)
β ­Blockers
Antipsychotics (including SSRIs, TCAs)
Lithium
Diuretics
Salicylates
Sympathomimetic agents
Calcium channel blockers
Antiseizure medications (topiramate, zonisamide)
DRUGS OF MISUSE/SUPPLEMENTS
Amphetamines (including ephedra)
Cocaine
Ecstasy
Phencyclidine
Cathinone (synthetic marijuana) agents
LSD
Alcohol
Anabolic steroids
SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors; LSD, lysergic acid diethylamide; TCA,
tricyclic antidepressants.

Table 731.2  Spectrum of Heat Illness
HEAT CRAMPS AND DEHYDRATION: CAUTIOUS RETURN TO
PLAY
Muscle cramps
Thirst
Fatigue
Light-­headedness
Sweating
Flushed face
HEAT EXHAUSTION: REMOVE FROM PLAY
Dizziness
Rapid pulse
Headaches
Nausea
Vomiting
Loss of coordination
Profuse sweating
Core temperature less than 40°C (104°F)
HEAT STROKE: MEDICAL EMERGENCY, CALL 911
Core temperature of 40°C (104°F) or higher
Hot dry skin
Multiple system failure
Delirium
Convulsions
Abnormal vital signs
From Merkel DL, Molony JT Jr. Medical sports injuries in the youth athlete: emergency
management. Int J Sports Phys Ther. 2012;7:242–251. Table 4.

intravascular volume and the body’s ability to dissipate heat. Immediate transport to an emergency facility is necessary. Physician clearance is required before return to exercise.
Dehydration is common to all heat illness; consequently, measures
to prevent dehydration may also prevent heat illness. Thirst is usually
an adequate indicator of hydration status; excessive hypotonic fluid
replacement beyond sweat and urine losses can lead to hyponatremia.
Endurance athletes should be cautioned not to drink beyond thirst.
Mild dehydration (2–3%) does not usually affect performance and
itself does not cause cramping, fatigue, or heat stroke.
Exercise-­associated hyponatremia (Na < 135 mmol/L) may be asymptomatic or symptomatic (lightheadedness, nausea, headache, confusion, cerebral edema) and is often seen in endurance sports (marathon,

4321

Table 731.3  Current Therapy for Heat-­Related Illness
• Acclimatization is key for prevention of exertional heat illness.
• Heat illness is most effectively managed by immediate recognition
of the signs and symptoms and proper diagnosis.
• Core body temperature measurement must be done with a rectal
thermometer.
EXERCISE-­ASSOCIATED COLLAPSE
• Continue walking after race to prevent development.
• Position the patient in the supine or Trendelenburg position and
start fluid administration.
HEAT EXHAUSTION
• Provide rapid cooling with ice bags to areas adjacent to large
vasculature (groin, neck, axilla).
• Administer oral or intravenous (IV) fluid to correct for hydration
deficit.
HEAT STROKE
• Ensure the ability to maintain adequate circulation, airway, and
breathing.
• Ice-­water immersion is the most effective way to provide rapid
cooling.
• The goal of cooling is to reduce and maintain a temperature
below 38.3°C (101°F).
• Transport to the hospital may be required if the patient’s
temperature is not reduced effectively or the patient does not
return to normal mental status after 30 minutes of medical
treatment.
From Cleland P. Heat illness. In: Kellerman RD, Rakel DP, Heidelbaugh JJ, Lee EM, eds.
Conn’s Current Therapy 2023. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2023: p. 1390.

Maintain plasma osmolality
within normal range

Minimize
hyponatremia

Drink to
THIRST

Prevent excessive
dehydration
(protect performance)

Maintain plasma volume
within normal range for the activity

Fig. 731.1 Primary recommended fluid intake strategy to prevent

symptomatic exercise-­associated hyponatremia. (From Hew-­Butler T,
Rosner MH, Fowkes-­Godek S, et al. Statement of the third international
exercise-­associated hyponatremia consensus development conference,
Carlsbad, California, 2015. Clin J Sport Med. 2015;25:303–320. Fig. 1.)

triathlon, cycling, swimming), hiking, football, and police or military
drills. Major risk factors include overdrinking water or hypotonic sports
drinks, weight gain during exercise, exercise duration >4 hours, readily
available fluids, and inexperienced or slow pace. Athletes are advised to
be hydrated before exercise and should drink to thirst (Fig. 731.1). Fluids
should contain sodium and not be ingested in excess.
During a football practice, for example, scheduled breaks every
20-30 minutes with helmets off can decrease the cumulative amount
of heat exposure. Practices and competitions should be scheduled in
the early morning or late afternoon to avoid the hottest part of the day.
Guidelines have been published about modifying activity related to
temperature and humidity (Fig. 731.2). Proper clothing such as shorts
and T-­shirts without helmets can improve heat dissipation. Prepractice
and postpractice weight can be helpful in determining the amount of
fluid necessary to replace (8 oz for each pound of weight loss). When
practicing or performing in a warm environment, gradual acclimatization is recommended.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4322 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

Relative humidity (%)

Classification

Temperature (°F)

NWS Heat index
80 82 84 86
40 80 81 83 85
45 80 82 84 87
50 81 83 85 88
55 81 84 86 89
60 82 84 88 91
65 82 85 89 93
70 83 86 90 95
75 84 88 92 97
80 84 89 94 100
85 85 90 96 102
90 86 91 98 105
95 86 93 100 108
100 87 95 103 112

88
88
89
91
93
95
98
100
103
106
110
113
117
121

90
91
93
95
97
100
103
105
109
113
117
122
127
132

92
94
96
99
101
105
105
112
116
121
126
131

94
97
100
103
106
110
114
119
124
129
135

96
101
104
108
112
116
121
126
132

98
105
109
113
117
123
128
134

100
109
114
118
124
129
136

102
114
119
124
130
137

104
119
124
131
137

106 108 110
124 130 136
130 137
137

Heat
index

Effect on the body

Caution

80°F 90°F

Fatigue possible with prolonged exposure and/or
physical activity

Extreme
danger

90°F 103°F

Heat stroke, heat cramps, or heat exhaustion
possible with prolonged exposure
and/or physical activity

Danger

103°F 124°F

Heat cramps or heat exhaustion likely, and
heat stroke possible with prolonged exposure
and/or physical activity

Extreme
danger

125°F or
higher

Heat stroke highly likely

Likelihood of heat disorders with prolonged exposure or strenuous activity

Caution

Extreme caution

Danger

Extreme danger

Fig. 731.2 Heat index. To determine the heat index using this chart, air temperature and the relative humidity need to be known. For example,
if the air temperature is 100°F and the relative humidity is 55%, the heat index will be 124°F. When the relative humidity is low, the apparent temperature can actually be lower than the air temperature. (Courtesy National Weather Service, United States National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration. https://www.weather.gov/ama/heatindex.)

Fluids with electrolytes and carbohydrates are important during
exercise lasting longer than 1 hour. Salt supplements should not be
used by most people because of the risk of causing hypernatremia and
delayed gastric emptying. If excessive fluid intake contributes to hyponatremia, salt supplements will not avoid the decline in serum sodium.
They may be useful in a person with a high sweat rate or recurrent heat
cramps.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Immunological
Gastrointestinal

Menstrual
function

Cardiovascular

Triad

Bone health

RED-S

Chapter 732

Nutrition and Endocrine
Conditions in Athletes
Gregory L. Landry and Andrew M. Watson

Psychological*

Endocrine

Growth +
development

Metabolic
Hematological

Excessive physical training in young women can adversely affect reproductive function and bone mineral status, especially when combined
with calorie restriction (Fig. 732.1; see Chapters 41 and 159).
The majority of bone mass is acquired by the end of the second
decade of life (see Chapter 749). Approximately 60–70% of adult bone
mass is genetically determined, and the remaining is influenced by
three modifiable factors: exercise, calcium intake, and sex steroids (primarily estrogen). Exercise promotes bone mineralization in the majority of young women and should be encouraged. In females with eating
disorders and those who exercise to the point of excessive weight loss
with amenorrhea or oligomenorrhea, exercise can be detrimental to
bone mineral acquisition, resulting in reduced bone mineral content,
or osteopenia. In males, prolonged negative energy balance can similarly result in bone demineralization, although this may be more occult
without the obvious sign of menstrual cycle disruption.
Specifically, bone mineralization is negatively affected by amenorrhea (absence of menstruation for 3 or more consecutive months). This
may be influenced by abnormal eating patterns, or disordered eating,
that results in insufficient caloric intake. When occurring together,
disordered eating, amenorrhea, and osteoporosis represent the female
athlete triad. A more inclusive definition refers to the interrelationships among energy availability, endocrine function, and bone mineral

Fig. 732.1 Health consequences of relative energy deficiency in sport

(RED-­S) showing an expanded concept of the Female Athlete Triad to
acknowledge a wider range of outcomes and the application to male
athletes. *Psychologic consequences can either precede RED-­S or be
the result of RED-­S. (Courtesy Dr. Naama W. Constantini, Shaare Zedek
Medical Center, Hebrew University, Israel.)

density, as athletes are distributed along a spectrum of health and
disease. The male athlete triad describes the impact of these interrelated problems in male athletes. In addition, the International Olympic Committee introduced the concept of relative energy deficiency
in sport (RED-­S), outlining the myriad physiologic, psychologic, and
performance consequences of low energy availability in both male and
female athletes (see Fig 732.1). At health supervision visits and the preparticipation physical examination, special attention should be given
to screening for any unhealthy features of the female or male athlete
triads (Tables 732.1 and 732.2).
In both male and female athletes, low energy availability can
result in disruption of the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­gonadal axis.
Menstrual abnormalities (including amenorrhea) result from

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 732 u Nutrition and Endocrine Conditions in Athletes
Table 732.1  Recommended Screening Questions for the
Female Athlete Triad*
• Have you ever had a menstrual period?
• How old were you when you had your first menstrual period?
• When was your most recent menstrual period?
• How many periods have you had in the past 12 months?
• Are you presently taking any female hormones (estrogen,
progesterone, birth control pills)?
• Do you worry about your weight?
• Are you trying to or has anyone recommended that you gain or
lose weight?
• Are you on a special diet or do you avoid certain types of foods or
food groups?
• Have you ever had an eating disorder?
• Have you ever had a stress fracture?
• Have you ever been told you have low bone density (osteopenia
or osteoporosis)?
*The Triad Consensus Panel recommends asking these screening questions at the time
of the sport preparticipation evaluation.
From Constantini NW. Medical concerns of the dancer. Book of Abstracts. XXVII FIMS
World Congress of Sports Medicine, Budapest, Hungary, 2002. p. 151.

Table 732.2  Recommended Screening Questions for the
Male Athlete Triad
• Do you worry about your weight?
• Are you trying or has anyone recommended that you lose or gain
weight?
• Are you on a special diet, or do you avoid certain types of foods
or food groups?
• Have you ever had an eating disorder?
• Have you ever had a stress fracture?
• Have you ever been told that you have low bone density or
osteoporosis?
• Have you ever been diagnosed with low testosterone levels?
• Do you have low libido (sex drive)?
• Do you have morning erections?*
• Do you need to shave your facial hair less frequently?*
*Recommend inclusion on only preparticipation physical examinations for postpubertal
athletes.
From Fredericson M, Kussman A, Misra M, et al. The male athlete triad – a consensus
statement from the Female and Male Athlete Triad Coalition part II: diagnosis,
treatment, and return-­to-­play. Clin J Sport Med. 2021;31(4):349–366. Box 1.

suppression of the spontaneous hypothalamic pulsatile secretion of
gonadotropin-­releasing hormone (Fig. 732.2; see Chapter 159.1). It
is believed that the amenorrhea results from reduced energy availability, defined as energy intake minus expenditure. Energy availability below a threshold of 30 kcal/kg/day lean body mass is thought
to result in menstrual disturbances, whereas availability at or above
45 kcal/kg/day is generally considered sufficient for optimal physiologic function. Other causes of menstrual cycle irregularities to be
ruled out are pregnancy (see Chapter 161), pituitary tumors, thyroid abnormalities, polycystic ovary syndrome (see Chapter 589),
anabolic-­androgenic steroid use (see Chapters 157 and 733), and
other medication side effects. Negative energy balance also appears
to disrupt thyroid function and appetite-­regulating hormones (e.g.,
leptin, ghrelin), increase resistance to growth hormone, decrease

4323

insulin and insulin-­like growth factor 1, and increase cortisol levels.
Although a threshold has yet to be established, low energy availability in males may also lead to decreased levels of testosterone and
luteinizing hormone.
The low estrogen state of amenorrhea predisposes the female
athlete to osteopenia and increases the risk of stress fractures,
especially of the spine and lower extremity. If left unchecked, bone
loss may be partially irreversible despite resumed menses, estrogen
replacement, or calcium supplements. Similarly, low energy availability in males reduces bone turnover and can contribute to bone
demineralization. Routine bone mineral density screening is not
recommended but can help guide treatment and return to activity
in severe cases.
Three eating disorders can occur in athletes, contributing to low
energy availability. Anorexia nervosa manifests as weight <85% of
estimated ideal body weight with evidence of starvation manifesting
as bradycardia, hypothermia, and orthostatic hypotension or orthostatic tachycardia. Bulimia nervosa manifests as recurrent episodes
(at least once weekly) of binge eating with a sense of lack of control
over eating during an episode with recurrent episodes of compensatory behaviors, such as induced vomiting or excessive exercise. A
third category, unspecified feeding or eating disorder (UFED), is
a general description for disorders failing to meet the criteria for the
two previous disorders. Many young people who previously were
diagnosed with UFED have a specific diagnosis of anorexia or bulimia. Signs of an eating disorder are weight loss, food restriction,
depression, fatigue, worsened athletic performance, and preoccupation with calories and weight. The athlete might avoid events surrounding food consumption or might hide and discard food. Signs
and symptoms include fat depletion, muscle wasting, bradycardia
worsened from baseline, orthostatic hypotension, constipation,
cold intolerance, hypothermia, gastric motility problems, and in
some cases lanugo (see Chapter 41). Electrolyte abnormalities can
lead to cardiac dysrhythmias. Psychiatric problems (depression [see
Chapter 39], anxiety [see Chapter 38], and suicide risk [see Chapter
40]) are of higher incidence in this population.
For treatment of eating disorders, control of the symptoms is a
central theme. The first step is confronting the athlete about the
abnormal behavior and unhealthy weight. In general, exercise is
not recommended if body weight is <85% of estimated ideal body
weight, although there are exceptions, especially if the athlete is
eumenorrheic. If the athlete is unable to gain weight with nutrition and medical counseling alone, then psychologic consultation
is sought (Fig. 732.3).
Most athletes will not initially admit a problem, and many are
unaware of the serious physical consequences. In some cases, athletes may have pursued athletic participation (e.g., in endurance
activities) as a means to reduce or maintain a low body weight.
A helpful technique in talking to these athletes is to sensitively
point out performance issues. Education about decreased strength,
endurance, and concentration can be a motivating factor for treatment. Often, the athlete’s family needs to be involved, and the athlete should be encouraged to reveal necessary information to them.
Psychology or psychiatry referral is important in the multidisciplinary approach to treatment of disordered eating. It is important
for the physician to monitor the athlete’s physical health while the
mental health professional is caring for the mental aspects of the
eating disorder.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4324 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Uterine pathology or outflow tract
disorder
History and Examination
Disorders of sexual differentiation
Initial Investigation (based on H&P)
•
•
•
•
•
•

F
I
N
D
I
N
G
S

D
I
A
G
N
O
S
I
S

LH, FSH, hCG
Prolactin
TSH, free T4
Estradiol, testosterone (total and free),
DHEA/S ± 8 AM 17 (OH) progesterone
Progesterone challenge test
± Pelvic ultrasound

Low to normal
gonadotropins
Negative progesterone
challenge test
Possibly ↑ prolactin

Normal gonadotropins
Possibly ↑ LH/FSH
↑ Total/free testosterone

Hypothalamic-pituitary
etiology
Rule out outflow tract
obstruction if not done so
previously
Consider FHA (prolactin
typically not elevated)*

Chronic anovulation/
PCOS

Positive progesterone
challenge test

Rule out pregnancy

↑ Gonadotropins
Negative progesterone
challenge test

Primary ovarian
insufficiency

Abnormal TSH,
prolactin, DHEA/S or
8 AM 17(OH)
progesterone

Specific
investigation of
endocrine disorder

* If energy deficiency-related amenorrhea, including exercise, weight loss, or disordered eating related, consult with sports dietitian and
obtain a bone mineral density test (site of testing should be based on the age of the patient: spine and whole body for growing children and
adolescents, spine and hip for adult women); refer or consult with endocrinologist if not experienced in treatment.

Fig. 732.2 Amenorrhea algorithm. Recommended clinical evaluation of an athlete with primary or secondary amenorrhea, or prolonged oligome-

norrhea, includes a history and physical examination, initial and follow-­up laboratory testing, and diagnosis by a physician. Referral or consultation
with endocrinology is recommended if the diagnosing physician is not experienced with treatment of functional hypothalamic amenorrhea or other
etiologies of amenorrhea. DHEA/S, Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate; FHA, functional hypothalamic amenorrhea; FSH, follicle-­stimulating hormone;
hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; LH, luteinizing hormone; PCOS, polycystic ovarian syndrome; TSH, thyroid-­stimulating hormone. (Modified
from Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, Illingworth P. Amenorrhea, anovulation, and dysfunctional uterine bleeding. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, eds. Endocrinology Adult and Pediatric, 6th ed. St. Louis: Saunders, 2010: pp. 2341–2355.)

Recovery of Bone Mineral Density
PROCESS: Years

Recovery of Menstrual Status
Recovery of Energy Status

PROCESS: Months

OUTCOMES:

PROCESS: Days
or Weeks

OUTCOMES:

nEstrogen continues to
inhibit bone resorption

nReproductive hormones
OUTCOMES:
nEnergy status will
stimulate anabolic
hormones (IGF-1) and
bone formation
nEnergy status will
reverse energy
conservation
adaptations

nEstrogen exerts an antiresorptive effect on bone

nEnergy status will
stimulate anabolic
hormones (IGF-1) and
bone formation

Fig. 732.3 Treatment of the female athlete triad. The
three components of the triad recover at different rates
with the appropriate treatment. Recovery of energy status is typically observed after days or weeks of increased
energy intake and/or decreased energy expenditure.
Recovery of menstrual status is typically observed after
months of increased energy intake and/or decreased
energy expenditure, which improves energy status. Recovery of bone mineral density may not be observed
until years after recovery of energy status and menstrual
status has been achieved. IGF-1, Insulin-­like growth factor-1. (From De Souza MJ, Nattiv A, Joy E, et al. 2014
Female Athlete Triad Coalition consensus statement on
treatment and return to play of the female athlete triad.
Br J Sports Med. 2014;48:289. Fig. 3.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 733 u Performance-­Enhancing Aids

Chapter 733

Performance-­Enhancing
Aids
Gregory L. Landry and Andrew M. Watson
See also Chapter 157.
Ergogenic aids are substances used for performance enhancement,
most of which are unregulated supplements (Table 733.1). Many agents
have significant side effects without proven ergogenic properties. The
2004 Controlled Substance Act outlawed the purchase of steroidal
supplements, such as androstenediol and androstenedione, with the
exception of dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA).
The prevalence of lifetime steroid use is highest among males in the
United States; among a large representative sample, 3–4% of males in
middle school and 5–6% of those in high school report having used
steroids for muscle enhancement. The European School Survey Project on Alcohol and Other Drugs found that 1% of European youth
reported any use of steroids. Steroids in oral, injectable, and skin cream
form are taken in various patterns. Cycling is a term used to describe
taking multiple doses of steroids for a period, ceasing, and then starting again. Stacking refers to the use of different types of steroids in both
oral and injectable forms. Pyramiding involves slowly increasing the
steroid dose to a peak amount and then gradually tapering down.
Anabolic-­androgenic steroids have been used in supraphysiologic doses for their ability to increase muscle size and strength and
decrease body fat. An evidence base does support the increase in
muscle mass and strength; the effects appear to be related to the myotrophic action at androgen receptors, as well as competitive antagonism at catabolism-­mediating corticosteroid receptors. However, they
have significant endocrinologic side effects, such as decreased sperm
count and testicular atrophy in men and menstrual irregularities and
virilization in women. Hepatic problems include elevated aminotransaminases and γ-­
glutamyl transferase, cholestatic jaundice, peliosis
hepatitis, and a variety of tumors, including hepatocellular carcinoma.
There is evidence that anabolic-­androgenic steroids might predispose
to a number of cardiovascular risk factors as well, including higher

4325

blood pressure, lower high-­density lipoprotein, higher low-­density
lipoprotein, higher homocysteine, and decreased glucose tolerance.
The possible psychologic effects include aggression, several personality
disorders, and a variety of other psychologic problems (anxiety, paranoia, mania, depression, psychosis). Physical findings that may accompany anabolic-­androgenic steroid use in males include gynecomastia,
testicular shrinkage, jaundice, male pattern baldness, acne, and marked
striae. Women can develop hirsutism, voice deepening, clitoral hypertrophy, male-­pattern baldness, acne, and marked striae.
Testosterone precursors (also known as prohormones) include
androstenedione and DHEA. Their use in the adolescent population
has increased markedly in conjunction with reports of high-­profile athletes’ use. They are androgenic but have not been proven to be anabolic.
If they are anabolic at all, they work by increasing the production of
testosterone. They also increase production of estrogenic metabolites.
The side effects are similar to those of anabolic-­androgenic steroids and
far outweigh any ergogenic benefit. These substances cannot be sold
without prescription.
Creatine is an amino acid mostly stored in skeletal muscle as creatine phosphate or phosphocreatine. Phosphocreatine has the ability
to rephosphorylate adenosine diphosphate through the donation of its
phosphate group, yielding creatine and adenosine triphosphate. Creatine phosphate is then reconstituted through oxidative phosphorylation. The exogenous provision of creatine can therefore allow for a
greater concentration of phosphocreatine in muscle, increasing muscle
performance. The use of creatine as an ergogenic aid has increased,
especially since other supplements have been withdrawn from the
market. Thirty percent of high school football players have used creatine. There is evidence that creatine, as a source of increased energy,
enhances strength and maximal exercise performance when used during training.
Caffeine is an active ingredient in energy drinks and some endurance sport supplements that has been shown to have ergogenic effects
in both aerobic and anaerobic efforts. It acts primarily as an antagonist at the adenosine receptor, resulting in a number of potentially
ergogenic effects such as reduced fatigue and increased muscle power.
Although moderate doses of caffeine are considered relatively safe,
when included in an energy drink combined with alcohol, excessive
caffeine ingestion may result in tachycardia, gastritis, nausea, vomiting,
and central nervous system excitation. Overdoses of caffeine may result
in seizures, arrhythmias, and hypotension.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Table 733.1  Characteristics of Common Performance-­Enhancing Substances
PERFORMANCE-­
ENHANCING
­ UBSTANCE
S

DESIRED EFFECTS

MAJOR ADVERSE
EFFECTS

MINOR ADVERSE
EFFECTS

ROUTE OF
­ADMINISTRATION

STATUS

Anabolic-­androgenic
steroids*

Increase muscle size,
strength, lean body
mass; decrease
body fat

Testicular atrophy,
CV disease,
atherosclerosis,
myocardial disease,
liver dysfunction,
cancer

Acne, gynecomastia

Banned by IOC and
all major sporting
bodies

Oral, topical,
injectable

Creatine

Increase in strength,
power output, sprint
performance, total
work to fatigue,
peak force/power;
decrease lactate
threshold; increase
weight and lean
body mass

Heatstroke

Dehydration

Allowed

Oral

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4326 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 733.1  Characteristics of Common Performance-­Enhancing Substances—cont’d
PERFORMANCE-­
ENHANCING
­ UBSTANCE
S

DESIRED EFFECTS

MAJOR ADVERSE
EFFECTS

MINOR ADVERSE
EFFECTS

STATUS

ROUTE OF
­ADMINISTRATION

Human growth
hormone†

May increase lean
body mass and
decrease fat mass

Carpal tunnel
syndrome,
intracranial
hypertension,
CV disease,
hyperlipidemia,
insulin resistance

Arthralgias

Banned by IOC
and International
Federations

Injectable

Amphetamines/
stimulants‡,§

Increase in alertness
and metabolism;
may increase
strength, muscular
power, speed,
acceleration,
aerobic power,
anaerobic capacity,
endurance

Arrhythmias, heat
exhaustion,
seizures, myocardial
infarction, sudden
death

Agitation, GI upset,
nausea, headaches,
insomnia,
hallucinations

Banned by IOC,
NCAA, NFL

Oral, injectable,
inhalable

Erythropoietin/blood
doping

Increase in oxygen-­
carrying capacity,
endurance

Hypertension,
myocardial
infarction,
pulmonary
embolism, immune
reaction

Headaches

Banned by IOC and
all major sporting
bodies

Injectable

Beta-­hydroxy-­beta-­
methylbutyrate

May increase lean
body mass, muscle
strength, power;
enhance recovery

Unknown

Unknown

Allowed

Oral

Protein supplements

Increase lean body
mass, improve
healing

Unknown in previously Unknown
healthy athletes

Allowed

Oral

*Including selective androgen receptor modulators and aromatase inhibitors or estrogen receptor modulators.
†Including various growth factors (IGF-1, etc.).
‡Caffeine is commonly used and remains permitted by WADA.
§Includes various beta-2-­agonists prohibited by WADA, except when needed for therapy of asthma but within therapeutic limits.
CV, Cardiovascular; GI, gastrointestinal; IOC, International Olympic Committee; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; N/A, not applicable; NCAA, National Collegiate Athletic Association;
NFL, National Football League; WADA, World Anti-­Doping Agency.
Modified from Momaya A, Fawal M, Estes R. Performance-­enhancing substances in sports: a review of the literature. Sports Med. 2015;45:517–531. Table 1.

Chapter 734

Specific Sports and
Associated Injuries
Gregory L. Landry and Andrew M. Watson
SPORTS PARTICIPATION, EARLY SPECIALIZATION,
INJURY RISK, AND BURNOUT

It is estimated that 60 million youth, age 6-18 years, participate in organized athletics, with 44 million participating in multiple sports. It has
also been estimated that 69% of females and 75% of males age 8-17
years participate in at least one organized sport team or club. Participating in sport gives children the opportunity to develop self-­esteem
and leadership skills, promote peer socialization, and improve general
health and fitness. Some parents encourage their children to participate
in a single sport because they think this will allow the athlete more time
to focus on sport-­specific skills and will increase the likelihood that
their child will be selected for elite teams, a college scholarship, or professional contract. They may also feel pressure from coaches. However,

only 0.2–0.5% of U.S. high school athletes rise to the professional level;
Olympic-level athletes start training in their main sport at an older age
than their less elite peers and on average participate in two other sports
before, or in parallel with, their main sport. A study at the collegiate
level revealed that 70% of surveyed athletes did not specialize in their
sport until 12 years of age, and 88% participated in more than one sport
at some point during childhood. Multisport athletes, in general, have
a more diverse skill set, can transfer skills from one sport to another,
have a decreased risk of overuse injury, have lower rates of burnout,
and thus are less likely to quit sports at a younger age. Exposure to
multiple sports also allows these athletes to identify the sport they most
enjoy.
Risk of injury in sports increases with age and training volume. In
general, there is an increased risk of injury if young athletes participate
in more weekly organized sport hours than their age. When young athletes exceed a 2:1 ratio of weekly hours in organized sports to weekly
hours in unorganized free play, they are more likely to suffer a serious overuse injury. Overuse injuries unique to young athletes include
apophyseal injuries and physeal stress injuries secondary to decreased
muscle mass, increased joint hypermobility, and imbalances in growth
and strength (see Chapter 728). Overuse injuries and fractures are more
likely to occur during adolescent growth spurts as physes, apophyses,
and articular surfaces in a rapid phase of growth are less resistant to
tensile, shear, and compressive forces than either mature bone or more
immature prepubescent bone, and because of decreased blood flow to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 734 u Specific Sports and Associated Injuries
the physes. When this underlying vulnerable physiology is combined
with overscheduling secondary to participation in a large number of
competitive events at young ages, the risk of overuse injury increases.
These events often include tournaments, which may consist of multiple
games in a short period of time. This type of schedule does not allow
enough time for rest and recovery.
Sports specialization is traditionally defined as “participating in a
single sport for greater than eight months per year, choosing a single
main sport, and/or quitting all other sports to focus on one sport.”
Athletes who specialize early sometimes report increased anxiety and
stress secondary to worrying about failure, trying to meet adult expectations, or experiencing parental pressure to participate or perform
at a certain level, and often feel as though they have a lack of control
in sport decision-­making. These feelings can contribute to burnout,
which can lead to quitting sports early and ultimately increased inactivity as an adult. To reduce the risk of overuse injury and burnout, one
should limit weekly and yearly participation time, limit sport-­specific
repetitive movements, and ensure adequate rest and recovery periods.
Thus it has been recommended that “intense training in a single sport
to the exclusion of others should be delayed until adolescence in order
to optimize success while minimizing injury, stress, and burnout.”

FOOTBALL

Football is the sport with the greatest number of participants in the
United States, especially at the high school level, and with the highest
number and rate of injuries. Most of these injuries are relatively minor,
and compared with injuries in many other sports, are less severe, as evidenced by fewer days lost from injury. Age, weight, and position played
contribute to injury risk, with older and heavier players, running backs,
and linebackers having higher injury rates. The most common football
injuries include joint sprains, muscle strains, and contusions, with the
lower extremities injured most frequently.
Although the majority of catastrophic sports injuries in the United
States have occurred in football, these injuries are rare. Catastrophic
injury is defined as a fatal injury or a severe injury with or without permanent severe functional disability. Disabling injuries include cervical
spine and cerebral injuries.
Head and neck injuries in football include concussion, neck sprain,
and brachial plexopathy. Compared to other sports, brain injury (concussion) (see Chapter 729) occurs with the highest rate in football, a
result of the frequent exposure to contact during practices and games,
although more concussions occur in games than practices. When compared to other sports, cervical spine injuries occur at higher rates in
football given the increased risk of high-­velocity contact, neck flexion,
and axial loading. Proper blocking and tackling form with the neck
extended rather than flexed is essential to help reduce the risk of cervical spine injury. Although not shown to reduce the concussion rate,
helmets can help reduce facial and dental trauma and provide some
protection from side head blows. A “stinger” or “burner” represents
a brachial plexus neurapraxia (see Chapter 730). This is the most common nerve injury in football and results from traction, compression,
or a direct blow to the upper cervical nerve roots of the brachial plexus
caused by forceful lateral neck bending.
Heat illness is possible in pediatric athletes given physiologic factors, including increased heat production per body weight, less efficient heat dissipation, and higher body temperatures associated with
dehydration. Dehydration and associated electrolyte abnormalities and
poor acclimatization increase the risk of heat illness. Heat illness risk
can be reduced with proper hydration prepractice, during, and postpractice, avoiding practice in high heat or humidity, wearing breathable, light-­colored clothing, removing the helmet between plays, and
avoiding certain medications such as antihistamines, anticholinergics,
stimulants, and supplements (see Chapter 731).
Contusions to the arm or thigh muscles can result in the development of a large hematoma if not treated aggressively in the acute stage,
resulting in prolonged time away from football. Large hematomas
and those allowed to persist are at risk for development of myositis
ossificans.

4327

Low back pain can be caused by spondylolysis, especially in players with repetitive hyperextension of the spine (see Chapter 720.6).
Education on tackling mechanics, core strengthening, and hamstring
flexibility are important in prevention of and/or recovery from a spondylolysis injury. Shoulder trauma can cause glenohumeral joint dislocations, the majority of which are anterior dislocations and have a
high rate of recurrence; acromioclavicular joint sprains; and fractures
to the clavicle or humerus (see Chapter 724). Knee injuries (see Chapter 728.6) are common and include anterior cruciate ligament (ACL)
tears and, less frequently, medial collateral ligament (MCL) tears. Knee
bracing in high school football players is controversial and lacks significant evidence.
Ankle sprains occur frequently, with lateral ankle sprains resulting
in less time away from the sport than high ankle sprains. The risk of
re-­injury may be reduced by rehabilitation, including strengthening
and range of motion, and the use of a lace-­up ankle brace (see Chapter 728.8). Turf toe, a sprain to the first metatarsophalangeal joint,
is caused by forceful dorsiflexion of the toe while wearing soft, lightweight, flexible shoes. Calcaneal apophysitis at the insertion of the
Achilles tendon on the calcaneus, also known as Sever disease, is an
overuse injury that typically presents as heel pain in a cleated athlete
who is still growing (typically age 7-10 years).

BASEBALL/SOFTBALL

Baseball-­and softball-­related injury sites are most commonly the
shoulder, elbow, ankle, and hip. Facial injuries and concussions are also
seen. The most common mechanisms of injury include pitching repetition and being hit by a ball or a bat.
Throwing injuries of the shoulder and elbow are typically seen
in pitchers secondary to overuse, with contributory factors, including high pitch count, pitch type, and inadequate rest. Little League
shoulder is a repetitive microtrauma injury to the open proximal
humeral physis, and Little League elbow is a repetitive microtrauma
injury to one or more of the six ossification centers in the elbow (see
Chapter 728.3). Little League shoulder is the most common injury
seen in softball windmill pitching, with similar shoulder stress as seen
in overhand pitching. Poor core strength and alteration in biomechanics, especially when fatigued, may contribute to injury risk (Fig.
734.1). Age-­related pitch count and rest guidelines, “Pitch Smart,” are
available online and are endorsed by the Little League. Curve balls
and sliders should not be thrown by players younger than 14 years
of age. Current recommendations also advise against participating in
multiple leagues and participating in year-­round baseball, given the
increased risk of injury with this volume of play. Adherence to the
guidelines is the responsibility of the athlete, parents, and coaches.
Counseling athletes (and coaches) to stop all throwing activities if the
player experiences shoulder or elbow pain, with medical evaluation
if no resolution with rest, is essential. If injured, a gradual return to
throwing protocol under the direction of a physical therapist with
additional focus on strengthening and throwing mechanics should
be considered. Catchers are more vulnerable to traumatic sprains of
the interphalangeal and metacarpal phalangeal joints, head injuries,
including concussions from the ball striking the mask, and knee injuries associated with the deep squatting posture. Knee savers are pads
attached to the shin guards that increase the angle between the knee
and thigh and prevent hyperflexion of the knees. No scientific studies
have been done to assess their effectiveness.
Death or serious injury in baseball is rare but may result from direct
contact by the ball or bat, causing serious head injury or commotio
cordis, which is a direct blow to the chest during a critical time in the
cardiac cycle resulting in a possibly fatal arrhythmia. Batting helmets,
with consideration of faceguards, must be worn properly to help prevent face and head injuries. Modifications to the hardness of baseballs
used with younger athletes may also be helpful. Chest protectors have
not been shown to reduce the risk of commotio cordis.
Sliding causes the most injuries in base runners, including head
injury and lower limb injuries. If sliding is allowed, correct sliding technique must be taught because many injuries are secondary to timing

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4328 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
issues. Head-­first sliding is controversial and is not recommended for
players younger than 10 years of age.

BASKETBALL/VOLLEYBALL

When combining male and female sports participation, basketball has one
of the highest injury rates, even though it is considered a “safe sport” from
a contact perspective. Common maneuvers of basketball and volleyball
include jumping, pivoting, running, and sudden acceleration and deceleration, which increase the risk for knee and ankle injuries. Similarly, injury
to the fingers may result from the passing, catching, and striking of the ball
inherent in these sports. Scaphoid fractures may result from falling on an
outstretched hand. Injuries to the face and eyes can also occur.
Ankle sprains are the most common injury and are usually caused
by inversion with plantar flexion, placing the lateral ligaments at risk.
An avulsion fracture of the base of the fifth metatarsal at the insertion of the peroneus brevis tendon is another sequela of inversion ankle
injuries. A high ankle sprain or syndesmosis ligament injury typically
results from an excessive external rotation in a dorsiflexed position,
and these athletes have pain out of proportion to examination findings.
Foot pain may be secondary to calcaneal apophysitis (Sever disease),
retrocalcaneal bursitis, posterior tibialis tendinosis, accessory tarsal
navicular, sesamoiditis, blisters, subungual hematoma, and paronychia
(see Chapter 704). Achilles tendinosis is also a common overuse injury.
Knee injuries include those caused by overuse, such as traction
apophysitis at the insertion of the patella tendon on the tibial tubercle
(Osgood-­Schlatter disease) (see Chapter 718.4), traction apophysitis
at the distal patella (Sinding-­Larsen-­Johansson syndrome) and patellar tendinosis (jumper’s knee) (see Chapter 728.6).
ACL injury occurs in both male and female participants; however,
among children 12-17 years old, the frequency of ACL injury in female
participants is slightly higher. The exact reason for this discrepancy is
unclear; however, some data suggest that female athletes do not exhibit the
same neuromuscular adaptions that male athletes exhibit during pubertal
growth spurts. Multiple studies on the effect of neuromuscular training
and strengthening programs focused on ACL injury prevention in females
suggest that these types of programs may reduce the risk of ACL injury.
As with other jumping sports, other acute ligament sprains (MCL with or
without ACL) can occur. For all participants, a program focused on the
sport-­specific strengthening of hip, core, and hamstring muscles to prevent
dynamic valgus when landing can help to reduce knee injury rates.
The overhead nature of volleyball can result in overuse shoulder
injuries, including rotator cuff tendinosis, shoulder impingement syndrome, labral tears, and glenohumeral instability. Players may want to
limit the number of overhead spikes and serves they perform, similar to pitch count limits in baseball, to help reduce the risk of overuse

A

B

injuries. Finger injuries seen in both basketball and volleyball participants include sprains, dislocations, and fractures.
Eye injuries, although rare, can be reduced by wearing protective
eyewear. Facial injuries typically result from an elbow or hand hitting the opponent’s face during rebounding or defending. Head injury
can occur in both sports when the player makes contact with another
player, the floor, or equipment (such as the net pole in volleyball).

TENNIS

Injury rates in high-­level youth tennis players are higher than in adults.
Tennis injuries occur twice as often in the lower extremity as in the upper
extremity. Lower extremity injuries tend to be more acute, whereas upper
extremity and trunk injuries tend to be more chronic, and the incidence
of overuse injury is high. Overall injury rates are similar for males and
females. However, male players age 5-10 years were more likely to sustain
injuries to the head and neck and suffer injuries as a result of contact with
the net, ball, or racket than other groups.
The most common injury in tennis players is to the ankle, although the
knee and thigh are vulnerable as well. Lower extremity injuries are related
to the frequent directional changes, creating significant concentric and
eccentric loads. Overuse injuries include iliopsoas tendonitis or bursitis,
patellofemoral stress syndrome, patellar tendinosis, Osgood-­Schlatter disease, medial gastrocnemius strain (“tennis leg”), Achilles tendonitis, and
Sever disease. Stress fractures in the lower extremity in elite players are
most common at the tarsal navicular, metatarsals, and tibia.
In the upper extremities, tennis elbow (lateral epicondylosis with
extensor carpi radialis brevis tendinosis) and extensor carpi ulnaris
(ECU) tendinosis with or without subluxation, are particularly prevalent in the recreational player and are thought to be most likely related
to overuse and improper technique (see Fig. 728.11). With repetitive
overload of the wrist flexor–pronator muscle groups, traction apophysitis at the medial humeral epicondyle and medial epicondylar fragmentation of the humerus, especially in younger males, can occur. This
can secondarily involve the ulnar collateral ligament and ulnar nerve.
Shoulder pain often results from labral injury, a common site of injury
for overhead athletes. Anteroposterior glenohumeral instability, glenohumeral internal rotation deficit with impingement, rotator cuff strain,
and scapular dyskinesis are all possible. Wrist problems include an
enlarged dorsal ganglion cyst, radiocarpal joint capsular impingement
or synovitis, chronic degenerative tears of the triangular fibrocartilage
complex, and acute fracture of the hook of the hamate. Stress fractures
may occur in the metacarpals (second metacarpal in particular) and
less commonly in the humerus, ulna, and radius.
It has been hypothesized that repeated loading during service, particularly using a “topspin” serve at a young age, may contribute to the

C

Fig. 734.1 Little League shoulder MRI findings. A, Coronal oblique fat-­saturated T2 weighted image in a 12-­yr-­old pitcher demonstrates diffuse

proximal humeral primary physeal widening and undulation with bone marrow edema within the metaphysis and lateral epiphysis. B and C Sagittal
oblique fat-­saturated T2 weighted images obtained in a 13-­yr-­old pitcher demonstrate preservation of the normal anterior medial humeral physis
(arrows) in contrast to the widened irregular physis posteriorly and laterally. (From Braithwaite KA, Marshall KW. The skeletally immature and newly
mature throwing athlete. Radiol Clin N Am. 2016;54:841–855.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 734 u Specific Sports and Associated Injuries
development of spondylolysis (pars interarticularis fracture) or
spondylolisthesis. However, the most common back injury in tennis is
lumbar muscle strain.

LACROSSE

Lacrosse is one of the fastest growing sports for both male and female
youth, high school, and college level athletes. Protective equipment and
rules are different for male and female players. Required equipment
for male players includes mouth guard, helmet, gloves, and elbow and
shoulder pads. Required equipment for female players includes eye
wear and mouth guard. Checking is allowed in men’s lacrosse but is
not permitted in youth or women’s games.
Injury rates are nearly three times higher in competition than
in practice. The most common injuries for all players include lower
extremity injuries, primarily ankle and knee sprains, and head injuries.
Ankle sprains typically occur in the setting of cutting, dodging, and
twisting activities. The likelihood of subsequent injury may be reduced
with bracing. ACL tears are a common knee injury and typically occur
in noncontact cutting or pivoting. Prepractice training should include
balance, lower extremity strengthening, and neuromuscular feedback
activities, as these have been proven to help reduce the ACL injury rate.
Head injury occurs in both male and female players. Player-­to-­
player contact is the typical mechanism for head injury in male players. Incidental contact with the stick is the typical mechanism for head
injury in female players. Eyewear for female athletes has been shown to
reduce the risk of significant eye injury.
Upper extremity injuries include acromioclavicular sprains and hand
and thumb fractures, particularly in games that permit contact and checking. Shoulder and elbow injuries are typically secondary to contact injury.
As with any sport with significant protective equipment that impedes
heat loss, heat illness can occur. Players and coaches should be mindful
of hydration, temperature, humidity, and duration of play. Commotio
cordis is a rare but possible risk. The use of chest protectors has been
evaluated and has not been shown to reduce risk.

SWIMMING/DIVING

In competitive swimming, injuries to the shoulder are most common and
are generally a result of chronic overuse. Swimmer’s shoulder is a general
term for shoulder overuse in a swimmer and is typically a combination
of subacromial impingement/bursitis and tendinosis of the rotator cuff
and long head of the bicep tendon. Commonly, a narrowed subacromial
space, increased laxity of the shoulder capsule, and relative weakness of
the scapular stabilizers result in protracted shoulder posture, which contributes over time to the insidious onset of shoulder pain and possible
scapulohumeral dyskinesis. Freestyle, back, and butterfly strokes tend to
exacerbate the pain. Prevention includes monitoring training load, proper
technique, and strengthening exercises. The multiaxial instability of the
glenohumeral joint common in swimmers is addressed with rehabilitation
focusing on strengthening of the rotator cuff and scapular stabilizer musculature. Knee and hip/groin pain can be exacerbated with breaststroke
given the whip kick motion required in this stroke.
Swimmer’s ear, or otitis externa, presents with pain and often
drainage from the external auditory canal. It is caused by bacterial,
or less commonly, fungal infection of the external auditory canal as a
result of chronic, excessive wetness (see Chapter 679).
Diving is a sport that many athletes start at a young age with early sport-­
specific, specialized training. The most common injury for divers is shoulder strain, given overhead activity and the significant force taken by the
shoulder, which is dependent on the angle of entry into the water. Low
back pain can be seen in divers and may be associated with lumbar hyperextension to compensate for limited shoulder flexibility when entering the
water, which can lead to spondylolysis. Diving is also associated with a risk
of cervical spinal cord injury secondary to axial loading; according to the
National Spinal Cord Injury Statistical Center, diving is the fifth leading
cause of spinal cord injury in the United States.

SOCCER

Soccer enjoys a very high level of popularity and participation among
youth worldwide. In the United States, the annual rate of injury in

4329

soccer more than doubled between 1990 and 2014, and almost three
million children were seen in U.S. emergency departments for injuries
related to soccer during those years. Mechanisms of injury include noncontact, body-­to-­body contact, falls, or ball-­to-­body contact. Although
lower extremity injuries are by far the most common, younger children
are more likely to injure an upper extremity, and upper extremity injuries are most likely to be fractures. Torso and significant abdominal
injuries can occur. Low back symptoms are relatively less common and
are most often muscular in nature.
Injuries in youth soccer occur predominately in the lower extremity
and include joint and ligament injuries, abrasions, contusions, muscle strains, and fractures of the ankle, knee, and thigh. Ligamentous
injuries to the ACL and MCL at the knee and the anterior talofibular
ligament at the ankle can occur because of the cutting and pivoting
maneuvers required during play or as a result of contact with another
player. ACL injuries, particularly in females, have gained attention
in recent years. ACL injuries are more common in high school girls’
soccer than in other girls’ sports. Risk factors may include genetics,
hormones, age, sex, previous injury, and anthropomorphic factors.
Overuse syndromes such as patellofemoral dysfunction, Osgood-­
Schlatter, Sinding-­
Larsen-­
Johansson, and Sever disease frequently
occur. Hip problems include the hip pointer (iliac crest contusion),
iliac crest apophysitis, and chronic groin pain (muscle strain, sports
hernia, osteitis pubis). The terms sportsman’s hernia, inguinal insufficiency, and conjoint tendon tear may comprise a constellation of different pathologic processes producing similar groin pain. These injuries
may occur with the combined forceful rotation of the torso and kicking
motion. Femoral neck stress fractures, slipped femoral capital epiphysis, and avulsion fractures of the pelvis or femur should also be considered in the differential. Neuromuscular factors, such as quadriceps
dominance, muscle activation patterns and dynamic stability, may
be modifiable; thus the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), and
other organizations support neuromuscular training programs aimed
at risk reduction for both sexes.
Concussion is common in soccer, primarily as a result of contact
between players, player and goal post, and player and ground. Recent
evidence suggests that intentional heading of the ball rarely results in
a concussion, although the long-­term effect of repeated subconcussive
impacts for intentional heading remains unknown. The U.S. Soccer
Concussion Initiative updated recommendations to reduce head injury
risk in youth soccer players, including a ban on heading the ball for
age 10 and under and limited heading of the ball for 11-13 year olds.
It remains unknown if this has reduced the number or severity of concussions. Padded headbands have not been shown to reduce the risk of
concussion in youth soccer players.

ICE HOCKEY

Ice hockey is a fast-­paced collision sport associated with injuries caused
by contact from other players, the ice, or the boards, as well as from
the puck or stick. With injury rates similar to other high school full-­
contact sports, concussions, contusions, fractures, ligament sprains,
muscle strains, lacerations, joint separations, dislocations, and subluxations are commonly reported. Injuries are more likely to occur in
competition than in practice, and overall injury rates appear to be on
the rise, possibly related to increased participation.
Concussion was the most commonly reported injury in U.S. high
school ice hockey athletes, with head and face injuries accounting for
34% of all of the reported injuries. Injuries to the shoulder and arm are
also common and include contusions, strains, acromioclavicular separations, and clavicle fractures. Over 50% of upper extremity fractures
occur in the forearm, wrist, and hand. Other specific hockey injuries
include hip pain secondary to femoroacetabular impingement (FAI),
high ankle sprains, hip adductor strain, and osteitis pubis.
The role of factors such as age, size, level of skill, player position,
and sex in injury risk is inconclusive, although evidence suggests that
concussion may be more frequent in females and fractures more common in males.
Body checking is the single most common mechanism of injury. In
Canada, 11-­and 12-­year-­old Pee Wee hockey players who were allowed

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4330 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
to body check had a threefold greater risk of injury than those who
were not. USA Hockey rules of play do not allow body checking in
the 12-­year and under youth leagues. Body checking is not allowed in
girls’/women’s leagues of any age. The AAP recommends the expansion
of nonchecking programs and the restriction of body checking to elite
levels of boys’ play after 15 years of age. AAP recommendations also
include the use of protective equipment (helmets and full-­face shields
or cages), rules to eliminate dangerous play with a zero-­tolerance policy for head contact and body contact from behind, and safer play education for coaches and athletes.

FIELD HOCKEY

Field hockey is played worldwide by both male and female athletes.
Protective equipment, including mouth, shin, and ankle guards, is recommended but not required. Players are twice as likely to be injured in
game versus practice. Lower limb injuries, particularly inversion ankle
sprains, are the most common. Bracing may help with ankle re-­injury
rates. Other lower extremity injuries include hamstring strain, ACL
tears, and contusions. The most common upper limb injury occurs
when the hand is struck by a stick or a ball, as field hockey does not
require the use of padded gloves for protection. Head injury and facial
lacerations occur at a very high rate and are typically caused by contact
with the stick or ball. Injury types and rates may differ based on the
position played; however, specific data are lacking.
Injury prevention is important in this sport and can be attained via
the use of protective equipment, including permitted head or face protection, and sport-­specific training, including balance, strengthening,
and proprioceptive training activities.

SKIING AND SNOWBOARDING

Injury frequency in skiing, snowboarding, and related winter sports has
declined over the past several decades, largely secondary to improved
equipment (boots, bindings, poles) and slope conditions. Of concern,
however, is that severe head and spinal cord injuries are on the rise due
to increased speed and the addition of acrobatic maneuvers (terrain
parks, half pipes, aerial tricks). Head and neck injuries are the primary
cause of fatal injury. Of the World Cup events, freestyle skiers (particularly aerials and slope style) have a higher incidence of head injury than
snowboard and alpine events. Overall, the risk of injury is higher in
snowboarders, males, beginners, and those with improper equipment.
Lower extremity injuries are more commonly associated with skiing,
while head, internal organ, upper extremity, and ankle injuries are more
common in snowboarders. The most common lower extremity injury in
skiing is ligamentous (ACL, MCL, and LCL) at the knee. Lower-­extremity
injuries in skiers also include contusions, knee dislocation, femur fractures,
spiral fractures of the tibia (“boot top” fractures), and high ankle sprains.
Snowboarders are at a unique risk for fracture of the lateral process of the
talus, which is often initially misdiagnosed as an ankle sprain.
Upper-­extremity injuries are more common in snowboarding because
both of the snowboarder’s feet are strapped onto the same board and, without poles, there is an increased risk of falls on outstretched arms. Common
injuries include distal radial, ulnar, and metacarpal fractures, sprains, and
contusions. Other high-­incidence upper extremity injuries in snowboarding include shoulder soft tissue injuries, clavicle fractures, acromioclavicular sprains, and glenohumeral joint dislocations. A unique skiing injury is
skier’s thumb, a sprain of the ulnar collateral ligament of the thumb, which
typically results from a fall with the thumb in abduction and hyperextension around a ski pole. Phalanx fractures and bony avulsions can also be
associated with this injury.
Snow sport athletes may experience visceral injuries to the spleen, liver,
and kidney. Spine injuries, including fracture and strain, may also occur.
It is strongly advised that individuals of all ages wear helmets for
skiing and snowboarding. Wrist protectors are also recommended for
snowboarders. Care should be taken to ensure up-­to-­date and properly fitted and adjusted equipment. Preventive measures endorsed by
the AAP include participation in formal instruction, such as in a ski
school, having adequate supervision, and exercising responsible speed
and technique. Cardiovascular fitness, endurance, and muscle strength
are believed to be critical components in injury prevention; however,
there is limited supportive literature.

SKATEBOARDING

Injuries associated with skateboarding are predominantly acute, including contusions, lacerations, sprains, and fractures, affecting the wrists,
forearms, and to a lesser extent, the ankles and head. Fractures involving the upper extremities are more common in younger skateboarders,
often from a fall onto an outstretched arm. Lower-­extremity fractures
and head injuries predominate in the adolescent population, which is
likely because of higher complexity of the airborne maneuvers and tricks
often attempted. Loss of balance leading to a fall when failing to perform
a particular maneuver, especially when catching a wheel, is generally the
primary cause of injury. These falls can occur at high velocities (up to 40
mph), placing the skateboarder at risk for serious injuries.
Traumatic brain injuries do occur within this sport; the incidence
increases with age and is more common in males than females. In
older children and adolescents, the neglected use of helmets and the
increased speed of their skating contribute to this fact.
In addition to helmet use, other safety measures recommended
include wrist guards as well as elbow and knee pads. The building of
skateboard parks has been a recent strategy to remove skateboarders from pedestrians, bicyclists, and motor vehicle traffic, while also
encouraging adult supervision.

CYCLING AND MOTOCROSS

Bicycle riding has been a beloved childhood recreational activity for
decades. Cycling options have expanded to include a variety of events
such as track and road racing as well as mountain biking, mountain
bike terrain parks or “free-­riding,” cyclo-­cross, and freestyle BMX. As
increased speed, jumps, and other human-­made obstacles have been
added, risk for injury has increased. Motocross, beginning as early as 4
years of age, adds further complexity as it uses two-­wheeled motorized
cycles racing through designed outdoor courses.
Recreational bicycling injuries include abrasions, lacerations, contusions, and fractures. Head and face as well as genitourinary injuries
are common. Helmet use is strongly encouraged to reduce the risk of
serious head injury. Upper extremity fractures predominate in mountain bikers and mountain terrain park riders. Risk of injury is increased
in mountain biking males between 10 and 14 years and in those who
admit to riding faster than usual. Motocross riders sustain more serious injuries. Head injuries include skull fractures and a variety of intracranial bleeds that may occur even when using a helmet.

WRESTLING

Wrestlers may have great fluctuations in weight to meet weight-­
matched competition standards. Such fluctuations are sometimes
associated with fasting, dehydration, and then binging. Counseling
wrestlers and their parents regarding impaired performance from these
components of disordered eating, especially with respect to decreased
speed and strength, is important to deter athletes from incorporating
them into routine practice. Most states have rules in place to mitigate
this risk by limiting the amount of weight loss for each wrestler.
Wrestling moves apply a variety of torques or forces to the extremities and spine, potentially resulting in a number of common injuries.
Takedown maneuvers and subsequent impact with the mat can produce
concussions, neck strain/sprain, or spinal cord injury. Spondylolysis (see
Chapter 720.6) is a concern in wrestlers given repetitive lumbar extension.
Stingers and burners—also seen among football players—are
caused by stretching or pinching of the brachial plexus (see Chapter
730). Overall, the two most common sites of injury in wrestling are the
shoulder and knee.
At the shoulder, subluxation is common. This generally occurs anteriorly with the shoulder forcibly abducted and extended. Patients are
commonly aware of their shoulder slipping in and out. Injuries to the
hand are less common and typically include metacarpophalangeal and
proximal interphalangeal joint sprains.
Knee injuries (see Chapter 728.6) are also common, and include
prepatellar bursitis, medial and lateral collateral ligament sprains,
and medial and lateral meniscus tears. Acute or recurrent traumatic
impact to the mat can result in prepatellar bursitis. If the overlying skin
is broken, septic bursitis may occur, resulting in swelling, redness, and
warmth over the anterior knee.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 734 u Specific Sports and Associated Injuries
Dermatologic problems associated with wrestling include herpes
simplex (see Chapter 299: herpes gladiatorum), impetigo (see Chapter 706.1), staphylococcal furunculosis or folliculitis, superficial fungal
infections, and contact dermatitis. Herpes gladiatorum and superficial
bacterial skin infections are contraindications to wrestling until the
lesions have resolved. Washing of the wrestling mats with appropriate
antibacterial and antifungal solution is required after daily wrestling
sessions to keep the mats disinfected and prevent the spread of dermatologic contagion.
Auricular hematoma is caused by friction or direct trauma to the
auricle (see Chapter 683). If allowed to remain without evacuation,
irreversible deformity of the auricle often results, termed cauliflower
ear. Properly fitted headgear is the best means of prevention, and early
aspiration of the accumulated blood may reduce the risk of deformity.

RUNNING

Running for sport and exercise has increased in popularity for children
and adolescents. Running problems are typically caused by overuse
injury related to muscle imbalance; a minor skeletal deformity; repetitive overload; and/or poor flexibility, strength, endurance, or proprioception. With each step while running, the foot impact ranges from 3-8
times the athlete’s body weight. Errors in training, including increasing the distance or intensity of workouts too rapidly, often result in
injury to the runner. Minor variations (e.g., malalignment) in anatomy
that do not cause problems at rest can predispose to injury at specific
sites, such as over-­pronation contributing to increased patellofemoral
stress. Muscle fatigue, environmental temperature (see Chapter 731),
and running surface (grass vs unyielding concrete) also contribute to
injury. Barefoot or minimalist running shoes may promote greater
weight distribution through the forefoot during running, and biomechanical research suggests reduced joint forces through the knee
and hip. However, increased forces can occur through the foot, ankle,
and lower leg in individuals not accustomed to this style of running.
Prevention of injuries is possible by muscle-­strengthening exercises,
incorporating periods of rest into training plans, and the use of good-­
quality running shoes that match an athlete’s foot type.
Shin splints, or medial tibial stress syndrome, is a descriptive term
for pain located diffusely over the distal medial tibia and should be
distinguished from tibia stress fracture and chronic exertional compartment syndrome. Medial tibial stress syndrome is a periosteal stress
reaction at the insertion of the soleus muscle. It can be seen in new
runners, runners that have markedly increased their training duration
in a short period of time, and runners with higher body mass indices
(BMIs). Continued loading and stress of medial tibial stress syndrome
can lead to a stress fracture. Stress fractures in runners (see Chapter 724.4) have been documented at the femoral neck, inferior pubic
rami, subtrochanteric area, proximal femoral shaft, proximal tibia, fibula, calcaneus, tarsal navicular, metatarsals, and sesamoids. The most
common are in the metatarsals, tibia, and fibula. The anterior proximal tibia, femoral neck (tension or superior side), tarsal navicular, and
sesamoids are most at risk for nonunion.
Muscle strains most frequently affect the hamstrings, followed by the
quadriceps, hip adductors, soleus, and gastrocnemius muscles. Lower
extremity tendon injuries are more common than apophyseal injuries
in young, skeletally immature runners. Tendon injury is most common
in the Achilles tendon, followed by the posterior tibial, peroneal, iliopsoas, and proximal hamstring tendons. Achilles tendinosis should be
distinguished from retrocalcaneal bursitis.
Knee pain in the runner is frequently anterior in location and
is commonly caused by patellofemoral pain syndrome (runner’s
knee), which results from excessive dynamic, usually lateral, motion
of the patella in relationship to the femoral intracondylar groove (see
Chapter 728.6). The athlete’s body habitus (i.e., increased Q-­angle,
over-­pronation) and presence of core and hip abductor weakness may
contribute to this overuse injury. Posterior knee pain can be caused
by gastrocnemius strain, while posteromedial pain may be caused by
proximal tibial stress fracture or semimembranosus/semitendinosus
tendinosis. Lateral knee pain is commonly caused by iliotibial band
syndrome and less so by popliteal tendinosis, which may be precipitated by running downhill. Iliotibial band syndrome may combine a

4331

component of both bursitis and tendinosis owing to mechanical friction of the iliotibial band (an extension of the tensor fasciae latae) over
the lateral femoral epicondyle. Vague knee pain that worsens with
activity or traumatic event, particularly if associated with joint swelling, should raise suspicion for osteochondritis dissecans, most commonly located at the lateral aspect of the medial femoral condyle.
Chronic exertional compartment syndrome can involve any of the
muscle compartments, but the most common is the anterior compartment. There is typically poorly localized throbbing pain that begins
10-15 minutes into a run. Pain typically prevents further training, thus
limiting the risk of nerve injury (see Chapter 728.7).
Plantar fasciitis is an inflammation of the supporting structures of
the longitudinal arch of the foot due to repetitive cyclic loading with
foot strike. Pain is typically worst with the first step out of bed in the
morning and with running and is located on the medial aspect of the
heel. Pes planus and over-­pronation are common in these patients. Calcaneal stress fracture should be considered, especially in the amenorrheic distance runner (see Chapter 732).
The female and male athlete triads (or relative energy deficiency
in sport), referring to abnormalities in energy availability, endocrine
function, and bone health, are well documented in adolescent running
literature and are important education topics for the runner, parents,
and coaches (see Chapter 732).

CHEERLEADING

Like other sports, cheerleading has become increasingly popular and
evolved to become more competitive and athletic. Cheerleading can
begin as early as 3-6 years of age and includes skill levels ranging from
recreational to sideline, competition to professional. The sport includes
advanced gymnastic tumbling and “stunts” involving athletes lifting
and throwing other athletes overhead. This requires repetitive flexion,
hyperextension, and rotation of the spine as well as compressive loading on landings, and the risk of athlete contact and falls.
Stunting injuries account for the majority of injuries, with bases
(the athletes who lift, throw, and catch another athlete) at higher risk
of injury than fliers (athletes who are lifted and thrown). The primary
mechanism of injury is contact with another athlete. Injuries sustained
in tumbling are the second most common.
The overall injury rate in cheerleading is low at 1/1,000 athletic exposures. However, injuries may be severe; of all female sports, the risk of
catastrophic injury is the highest in cheerleading. Following a period of
increasing incidence of injury, it appears that injury rates have stabilized.
Head and facial injury accounts for almost one third of injuries sustained. Head trauma primarily results from falls while stunting or from
a pyramid formation, which includes the base cheerleaders as well. After
concussion, strains and sprains account for the most likely injuries, with
ankle the most common site followed by wrist and trunk. Fractures are
more likely to occur in the upper extremity. Overuse injuries are common.
Strategies to reduce the risk of injury include designating cheerleading as an official sport, ensuring athletes undergo preparticipation exams, participating in conditioning and strength training, using
proper lifting technique, avoiding stunting over hard surfaces, and
educating coaches and trainers about sport safety, including specific
rules for the execution of technical skills. The American Association of
Cheerleading Coaches and Administrators and others have also set up
rules to limit the type of stunts performed, and the National Federation of State High School Associations annually updates rules for spirit
events with the intent of improving cheerleading safety.

GYMNASTICS

Typically, males and females begin gymnastics participation at 4-5 years
of age. The highest level of competition is in the mid-­teens followed by
retirement, often by 20 years of age for females and mid-20s for males.
Both acute and chronic injuries, with a high incidence of overuse-­related
injuries, are seen in gymnasts and commonly involve the wrists, shoulders,
ankles, and back. Injury types and rates in the acrobatic and circus arts are
similar to those seen in traditional gymnastics.
The injury rate is similar in male versus female gymnasts. Lower-­
extremity injuries are more common in female gymnasts, whereas
upper body injuries occur with higher frequency in male gymnasts.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4332 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Apparatus competed upon accounts for this discrepancy, such as the
horizontal bar and ring exercises for male gymnasts, which place a
great deal of stress upon the shoulders, and floor exercise, vault, and
balance beam for female gymnasts, stressing the feet and ankles. In
addition to mechanical or traumatic injuries, female gymnasts may
have delayed menarche and can be at risk for hypothalamic amenorrhea or oligomenorrhea, as well as low body weight for height, which is
related to disordered eating. Despite the presence of these two components of the female athlete triad (see Chapter 732), the third component, reduced bone density or osteoporosis, is not commonly seen. In
fact, bone density tends to be high in most gymnasts, which is thought
to be secondary to their performance involving repetitive high-­impact
activities. Nevertheless, stress fractures, in both the upper and lower
extremities, are a significant problem. The short stature associated with
male and female gymnasts is probably caused by selection bias and not
the result of gymnastics training.
The amount of weight bearing through the upper extremities in
gymnastics can contribute to the development of both traumatic and
overuse injuries. During upper extremity weight bearing, the wrist,
particularly over the radial physis, is subjected to a force almost twice
the athlete’s body weight and up to 16 times the body weight during
high-­impact loading activities. This, along with repetitive motion, axial
compression, and torsional forces, contributes to the increasing frequency of wrist pain and injury in gymnastics and acrobatics. Wrist
pain and injury is also correlated with training intensity, based on skill
level and number of hours of training per week. Wrist injuries typically
seen include distal radial epiphysitis (gymnast’s wrist), triangular
fibrocartilage complex tears, scaphoid fractures, scapholunate dissociation, dorsal ganglion cysts, and wrist sprains (see Chapter 722).
Individualized training regimens, including gradual increase in training load and reduced training during growth spurts, as well as the use
of wrist orthoses, should be considered for these athletes.
Ankle sprain remains the most common injury in gymnastics, secondary to forces seen in landing and dismounting. Ankle sprains that
have not responded to conservative management should be further
evaluated for osteochondral defects of the talar dome. Heel pain may
be secondary to plantar fasciitis, Sever disease, or calcaneal stress fracture. Patellar tendinopathy may contribute to knee pain in a gymnast.
Spine injuries are notable for a high incidence of spondylolysis, a
stress fracture of the pars interarticularis, and, in less frequent cases,
spondylolisthesis, both related to repetitive extension loading of spine
(see Chapter 720.6). Other potential sources of back pain in a gymnast
include intervertebral disk pathology, Scheuermann disease (juvenile
kyphosis) (see Chapter 720.4), and mechanical back pain secondary to
biomechanical imbalances.

DANCE

Dance, including ballet, modern dance, or drill line, is a highly
demanding activity that may be associated with delayed menarche in
females and disordered eating in both female and male dancers (see
Chapter 732). Acute injuries commonly involve the lower extremities.
Overuse injuries are common, due to the repetitive nature of maneuvers incorporated into training and performance and occur at the same
rate in amateur male and female dancers. Injuries seen in modern/
contemporary dance are similar in type and incidence to those seen in
traditional ballet.
Frequently, kinetic chain dysfunction contributes to injury and
should be considered when evaluating the dancer. Common mistakes
in technique can cause injury, such as forcing excessive “turnout”
(external rotation at the hip) in ballet resulting in undue stress placed
upon the hip and knees (see Chapter 728.6).
Foot problems are common and include metatarsal stress fractures, subungual hematomas, sesamoiditis, tenosynovitis (especially of the flexor digitorum longus), plantar fasciitis, Achilles
tendinitis, retrocalcaneal bursitis, calluses, and bunions (see Chapter 728.7). A dancer’s fracture is an avulsion fracture of the distal shaft of the fifth metatarsal. This fracture is at risk for delayed

healing as a result of the tenuous blood supply in the area and may
necessitate surgical fixation. Common ankle injuries and pain
include acute sprains, anterior and posterior impingement syndromes, and osteochondral defects of the talus. Soft tissue impingement between the lateral malleolus and talus can cause persistent
pain after an inversion injury. Medial tibial stress syndrome (“shin
splints”) and tibial stress fractures are noted in the lower leg. Achilles
tendinopathy is seen due to the demands of running and jumping.
Patellar malalignment or hypermobility can result in patellofemoral
pain syndrome or, less frequently, patellar subluxation/dislocation.
Patellar tendinopathy is widely reported. Internal snapping hip
syndrome, caused by the iliopsoas tendon riding over the anterior
hip capsule and iliopectineal eminence, and hip flexor (rectus femoris and iliopsoas) tendinosis are commonly noted in traditional ballet. Gluteal region pain with sciatica may be a result of piriformis
syndrome, which occurs because of the repetitive external hip rotation required in ballet (see Chapter 728.5).
The proper time to allow a ballet dancer to go en pointe is a common question asked by dancers and parents alike. The average age
to go en pointe is 12 years. A functional test should be part of that
decision: if the young dancer is able to perform a passé steadily away
from the barre and maintain an en pointe position without pain or
instability, the dancer is likely ready to begin dancing en pointe.
Posterior impingement syndrome of the ankle can be seen with
dancing en pointe, given compression between bony or soft tissue
structures during terminal plantarflexion. An os trigonum is commonly the cause of bony-­related posterior impingement syndrome.

ADAPTIVE SPORTS

Participation in sports and recreational activities helps to minimize
deconditioning; improve strength, endurance, and cardiopulmonary
fitness; and promote companionship, sense of achievement, and self-­
esteem (see Chapter 756). Participation can also support the development of the child’s motor coordination and adjustment to physical
limitations. However, children with disabilities tend to participate
less in physical activity for myriad reasons, including lack of access
to activities or opportunities for participation, lack of self-­confidence,
and fear of injury by the child, parent, or physician. Direction into
appropriate sports/physical activity rather than excluding them should
be guided by the child’s physical or mental challenge, physical abilities,
preparticipation exam, and consideration of the American Academy of
Orthopedic Surgeons “participation possibility chart,” which outlines
recommended sports and recreation based on physical disability.
Fear of injury remains a barrier to participation for many; however, the risk of injury for an adaptive sport athlete is no greater than
for an athlete without disability. Injuries in the adaptive sport athlete
are influenced by the specific disability, equipment used, and prosthetic or orthotics worn. Acute soft tissue injuries, including skin
abrasions, contusions, sprains, and strains, tend to be the most common injuries; fractures and dislocations tend to be uncommon, given
the lower participation in contact sports. Overuse injuries commonly
occur in this athlete population. Lower limb injuries are more common in athletes with amputations or cerebral palsy, and upper limb
injuries are more common in spinal cord injury and wheelchair-­
based athletes. Appropriate training to support muscle balance and
avoid muscle imbalance, as well as the management of spasticity and
properly fitting prosthetics and orthotics can help to reduce the risk
of overuse injuries. Pressure sores are common in wheelchair-­based
athletes and can be avoided with vigilant skin care and monitoring
and weight shifting.
Consideration of the athlete’s disability and medications is essential
because they may have increased propensity for abnormalities in, for
example, thermoregulation, resulting in heat illness, and fluid and electrolyte derangements. This should be discussed and monitored with
the athlete, parents, athletic trainers, and coaches, as appropriate.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 735 u General Considerations in Skeletal Dysplasias

Section 3

The Skeletal Dysplasias
Chapter 735

General Considerations in
Skeletal Dysplasias
Julie E. Hoover-­Fong and Daniah Albokhari
Genetic skeletal disorders include skeletal dysplasias, as well as metabolic bone conditions, dysostoses, and other skeletal malformations
(Table 735.1).

4333

The chondroosteodysplasias, also known as skeletal dysplasias or
bone dysplasias, are a genetically and clinically heterogeneous group
of disorders with an estimated prevalence of 1/4,000 births. The chondroosteodysplasias can be divided into the chondrodysplasias and
osteodysplasias. The former includes genetic disorders of cartilage
and results in deficient linear growth, typified by achondroplasia. The
osteodysplasias are marked by abnormal bone structure, with a classic
example of osteogenesis imperfecta (see Chapter 742). The clinical picture of the chondroosteodysplasias is dominated by generalized skeletal
abnormalities with frequent involvement of nonskeletal elements. The
disorders range in severity from lethal in utero to such mild features as
to go undetected. Metabolic bone conditions, such as rickets or hypophosphatasia, are because of abnormal bone mineralization, whereas
the dysostoses affect a single bone (e.g., craniosynostosis). Many complex genetic syndromes include skeletal malformations as part of the
overall phenotype.
The chondrodysplasias are distinguished from other forms of short
stature by skeletal disproportion between the length of the torso and
the limbs. There are two basic categories of skeletal dysplasias: those
with predominantly short limbs versus short trunks. Figure 735.1 notes
the importance of cartilage in bone formation. Efforts to define the
extent of clinical heterogeneity has resulted in the delineation of well

Table 735.1  Nosology of Genetic Skeletal Disorders: 2023
GROUP #

NAME

EXAMPLES*

01

FGFR3 chondrodysplasias

Achondroplasia, hypochondroplasia, thanatophoric dysplasia type 1, 2

02

Type 2 collagen disorders

Achondrogenesis (COL2A1), Kniest dysplasia, Stickler syndrome (COL2A1
related)

03

Type 11 collagen

Stickler syndrome (COL11A1, COL11A2), Marshall syndrome

04

Sulfation disorders

Achondrogenesis (SLC26A2), diastrophic dysplasia, spondyloepimetaphyseal
dysplasia

05

Dysplasias with multiple joint dislocations

Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome types 1 and 2, SEMD with joint laxity

06

Filamins and related disorders

Frontometaphyseal dysplasias (multiple types), Larsen syndrome

07

Proteoglycan core protein disorders

Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasias (multiple types)

08

TRPV4 disorders

Metatropic dysplasia, spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia, SEMD

09

Pseudoachondroplasia and the multiple
epiphyseal dysplasias

Sticker syndromes (multiple types), MED (multiple types)

10

Skeletal disorders caused by abnormalities of
cilia or ciliary signaling

Short-­rib polydactyly syndromes (Jeune syndromes multiple types), Ellis-­Van-­
Creveld syndrome, Meckel syndrome

11

Metaphyseal dysplasias

Metaphyseal dysplasia (multiple types)

12

Spondylometaphyseal dysplasias

Spondylometaphyseal dysplasias (multiple types)

13

Spondyloepi(meta)physeal dysplasias

Multiple types

14

Severe spondylodysplastic dysplasias

Achondrogenesis (TRIP11), spondylometaphyseal dysplasia (GPX4, SBDS,
PAM16)

15

Mesomelic and rhizo-­mesomelic dysplasias

Robinow syndrome (multiple types), mesomelic dysplasia (multiple types)

16

Acromesomelic dysplasias

Multiple types

17

Acromelic dysplasias

Geleophysic dysplasias, acromicric dysplasias, Weill-­Marchesani syndrome
(multiple types)

18

Brachydactylies (isolated)

Multiple types

19

Brachydactylies (syndromic)

Multiple types, Coffin-­Siris syndrome (multiple types)

20

Bent bones dysplasias

Campomelic dysplasia, bent bone dysplasia

21

Primordial dwarfism and slender bones

Microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism (multiple types)

22

Lysosomal storage diseases with skeletal
involvement

Mucopolysaccharidosis types 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 10

23

Chondrodysplasia punctata (CDP)

Rhizomelic CDP (multiple types)
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4334 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 735.1  Nosology of Genetic Skeletal Disorders: 2023—cont’d
GROUP #

NAME

EXAMPLES*

24

Osteopetrosis and related osteoclast disorders

Osteopetrosis (multiple types)

25

Osteosclerotic disorders

Caffey disease and dysplasia, craniometaphyseal dysplasias

26

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) and bone
fragility

OI (multiple types), osteoporosis (multiple types)

27

Disorders of bone mineralization

Hypophosphatasia, hypophosphatemic rickets (multiple types)

28

Skeletal disorders of parathyroid hormone
signaling

Metaphyseal dysplasia (PTHR1, SIK3)

29

Osteolysis

Progeria, mandibuloacral dysplasias (multiple types)

30

Disorganized development of skeletal
components

Cherubism, fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva

31

Overgrowth and segmental overgrowth

Marfan syndrome, Loey-­Dietz syndrome, Sotos syndrome, Proteus syndrome

32

Genetic inflammatory or rheumatoid-­like
osteoarthropathies

Neonatal onset multisystem inflammatory disease

33

Cleidocranial dysplasias (CD)

CD (RUNX2, CBFB)

34

Syndromes with craniosynostosis

Carpenter syndromes, Crouzon syndromes, Pfeiffer syndromes

35

Craniofacial dysostosis

Treacher Collins syndrome (multiple types), frontonasal dysplasias;
mandibulofacial dysostosis (multiple types)

36

Vertebral and costa dysostosis

Spondylocostal dysostosis (multiple types), Klippel-­Feil syndrome (multiple
types)

37

Patellar dysostosis

Nail patella syndrome, Holt-­Oram syndromes

38

Limb hypoplasia (reduction defects)

Holt-­Oram, Cornelia de Lange syndrome (multiple types) Rothmund-­
Thompson syndrome, Poland syndrome, TAR syndrome

39

Split hand / foot ± other manifestations

Ectrodactyly-­ectodermal dysplasia-­cleft palate, split hand-­foot malformation
(multiple types)

40

Polydactyly-­syndactyly triphalangism

Preaxial polydactyly (multiple types), syndactyly types 1, 3, 4, 5

41

Defects in joint formation and synostosis

Multiple synostosis syndrome (multiple types), radio-­ulnar synostosis (multiple
types)

*Examples are not all inclusive; incomplete list.
SEMD, spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia; MED multiple epiphyseal dysplasia; ( ) gene notations in italics; TAR, thrombocytopenia absent radius.
Data from Unger S, Ferreira CR, Mortier GR, et al. Nosology of genetic skeletal disorders: 2023 revision. Am J Med Genet 2023;1-46 (Table 1).

Mesenchyme
condensation

Vascular
invasion
Hypertrophic
chondrocytes

Proliferating
chondrocytes

Secondary
ossification
center

Epiphyseal
cartilage
Bone
Growth
plate
Cartilage
anlage

Bone

Fig. 735.1 The importance of cartilage in bone formation. (From Horton WA. Skeletal development: insights from targeting the mouse genome. Lancet. 2005;362:560.)

over 200 distinct entities (Table 735.2). Many of these disorders result
from pathogenic variants of a relatively small group of genes, the chondrodysplasia genes. The better-­defined chondrodysplasia groups, such
as the FGFR3 and type II collagenopathy groups, contain graded series
of disorders that range from severe to mild. This severity spectrum

is increasingly appreciated in other skeletal dysplasia groups as more
pathogenic variants have been discovered and their associated phenotypes defined. For some genes, such as COL2A1, pathogenic variants
are distributed throughout the gene, and the clinical phenotypes merge
into one another across a broad range. There is much less phenotypic
overlap in other genes, such as FGFR3, in which the distribution of
pathogenic variants is more discrete.
Most chondrodysplasias require the analysis of information from the
history, physical examination, skeletal radiographs, family history, and
laboratory testing to make a diagnosis. The process involves recognizing
complex patterns that are characteristic of the different disorders (Tables
735.3-735.6). Metaphyseal dysplasias, for example, often are characterized by short stature, bowing of the legs, and a waddling gait. Most
metaphyseal dysplasias have normal serum levels of calcium and phosphate, alkaline phosphatase activity, and vitamin D metabolites. In addition, subtypes of metaphyseal dysplasias exist and have their own unique
features. Metaphyseal chondrodysplasia (Jansen type; see Chapter 737)
is typified by cupped and ragged metaphyses, which develop mottled
calcification at the distal ends of bone over time (Fig. 735.2). Hypercalcemia can occur. The Schmid type of metaphyseal chondrodysplasia
is less severe, although the radiographic appearance of the knees and
extreme bowing of the lower limbs resemble that in patients with familial hypophosphatemia. This condition is associated with defects in collagen type X (COL10A1), and the hip abnormalities are more debilitating
than in Jansen metaphyseal chondrodysplasia. Patients with both types
of metaphyseal chondrodysplasia have short stature.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 735 u General Considerations in Skeletal Dysplasias

4335

Table 735.2  Genetics of Some Skeletal Dysplasias
GENE LOCUS
COL2A1

ACG1

PROTEIN
Type II collagen α1 chain

Aggrecan

PROTEIN FUNCTION
Cartilage matrix protein

Cartilage matrix protein

CLINICAL PHENOTYPE

INHERIT

Achondrogenesis II

AD*

Hypochondrogenesis

AD*

SED congenita

AD

Kniest dysplasia

AD

Late-­onset SED

AD

Stickler dysplasia

AD

SED Kimberley

AD

SEMD Aggrecan type

AR

SEDL

Sedlin

Intracellular transporter

X-­linked SED tarda

XLR

COL11A1

Type XI collagen α1 chain

Cartilage matrix protein

OSMEDA

AD

COL11A2

Type XI collagen α2 chain

Cartilage matrix protein

OSMEDB

AR

COMP

Cartilage oligomeric
matrix protein

Cartilage matrix protein

Pseudoachondroplasia

AD

EDM1 (MED)

AD

COL9A2

Type IX collagen α2 chain

Cartilage matrix protein

EDM2 (MED)

AD

COL9A3

Type IX collagen α3 chain

Cartilage matrix protein

EDM3 (MED)

AD

MATN3

Matrilin-3

Cartilage matrix protein

EDM5 (MED)

AD

COL10A1

Type X collagen α1 chain

Hypertrophic cartilage matrix
protein

Schmid metaphyseal chondrodysplasia

AD

FGFR3

FGF receptor 3

Tyrosine kinase receptor for
FGFs

Thanatophoric dysplasia I

AD*

Thanatophoric dysplasia II

AD*

Achondroplasia

AD

Hypochondroplasia

AD

PTHR1

PTHrP receptor

G protein–coupled receptor for
PTH and PTHrP

Jansen metaphyseal chondrodysplasia

AD

DTDST

DTD sulfate transporter

Transmembrane sulfate
transporter

Achondrogenesis 1B

AR*

Atelosteogenesis II

AR*

Diastrophic dysplasia

AR

SOX9

SRY box 9

Transcription factor

Campomelic dysplasia

AD

RUNX2†

Runt-­related transcription
factor 2

Transcription factor

Cleidocranial dysplasia

AD

LMX1B

Transcription factor

Nail-­patella dysplasia

AD

CTSK

Cathepsin K

Enzyme

Pyknodysostosis

AR

RMPR

Mitochondrial
RNA-­processing
endoribonuclease

RNA-­processing enzyme

CHH

AR

DYNC2H1

Dynein, cytoplasmic two,
heavy chain 1

Cytoplasmic cilia-­related
protein

ATD

AR

SRPIII

AR

Calcium-­permeable TRP
ion channel

Transmembrane channel
protein

Brachyolmia type 3

AD

SMDK

AD

Metatropic dysplasia

AD

TRPV4

*Usually lethal.
†Also called CBFA1.

AD, Autosomal dominant; SED, spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia; SEMD, spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia; AR, autosomal recessive; EDM (MED), multiple epiphyseal dysplasia; FGF,
fibroblast growth factor; OSMEDA, otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia autosomal dominant; OSMEDB, otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia autosomal recessive; PTHrP,
parathyroid hormone-­related protein; PTH, parathyroid hormone; DTD, diastrophic dysplasia; SRY, sex-­determining region of the Y chromosome; CHH, cartilage-­hair hypoplasia;
ATD, Jeune asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy; SRPIII, short rib polydactyly syndrome type III; TRPV4, transient receptor potential vanilloid family 4; SMDK, spondyloepimetaphyseal
dysplasia Kozlowski type.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4336 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 735.3  Major Problems Associated with Skeletal
Dysplasias
PROBLEM

EXAMPLE

Table 735.4  Associated Anomalies in Skeletal Dysplasias
ANOMALY

EXAMPLE

Heart defects

Ellis-­van Creveld syndrome,
Jeune syndrome

Polydactyly

Short rib polydactyly, Majewski
type

Cleft palate

Diastrophic dysplasia

Ear cysts

Diastrophic dysplasia

Spinal cord compression

Achondroplasia

Lethality*

Thanatophoric dysplasia

Associated anomalies†

Ellis-­van Creveld syndrome

Short stature

Common to almost all

Cervical spine dislocations

Larsen syndrome

Severe limb bowing

Metaphyseal dysplasia, Schmid
type

Spine curvatures

Metatropic dysplasia

Encephalocele

Dyssegmental dysplasia

Clubfeet

Diastrophic dysplasia

Hemivertebrae

Dyssegmental dysplasia

Fractures

Osteogenesis imperfecta

Micrognathia

Campomelic dysplasia

Pneumonias, aspirations

Campomelic dysplasia

Nail dysplasia

Ellis-­van Creveld syndrome

Spinal cord compression

Achondroplasia

Conical teeth, oligodontia

Ellis-­van Creveld syndrome

Joint problems (hips, knees)

Most skeletal dysplasias

Multiple oral frenula

Ellis-­van Creveld syndrome

Hearing loss

Common (greatest with cleft
palate)

Dentinogenesis imperfecta

Osteogenesis imperfecta

Myopia/cataracts

Stickler syndrome

Pretibial skin dimples

Campomelic dysplasia

Immunodeficiency

Cartilage-­hair hypoplasia, Schimke
immunoosseous dysplasia,
spondyloenchondromatosis,
pathogenic variants in PEM3,
EXTL3, ADA

Cataracts, retinal detachment

Stickler syndrome

Intestinal atresia

Saldino-­Noonan syndrome

Renal cysts

Saldino-­Noonan syndrome

Camptodactyly

Diastrophic dysplasia

Poor body image

Variable, but common to all

Craniosynostosis

Thanatophoric dysplasia

Sex reversal

Campomelic dysplasia

Ichthyosis

Chondrodystrophia punctata

Hitchhiker thumb

Diastrophic dysplasia

Sparse scalp hair

Cartilage-­hair hypoplasia

Hypertelorism

Robinow syndrome

Comprehensive descriptions of disorders and references can be
found at the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) website
(http://omim.org/about), along with the most recent nosology for
genetic skeletal conditions.

Hypoplastic nasal bridge

Acrodysostosis

Clavicular agenesis

Cleidocranial dysplasia

Genital hypoplasia

Robinow syndrome

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Growth

Tail

Metatropic dysplasia

Omphalocele

Beemer-­Langer syndrome

Blue sclera

Osteogenesis imperfecta

*Mostly a result of severely reduced size of thorax.
†See Table 735.4.

The hallmark of the chondrodysplasias is disproportionate short stature. Although this refers to a disproportion between the limbs and
the trunk, most disorders exhibit some shortening of both, and subtle
degrees of disproportion may be difficult to appreciate, especially in
premature, obese, or edematous infants. Disproportionate shortening
of the limbs should be suspected if the upper limbs do not reach the
mid-­pelvis in infancy or the upper thigh after infancy. Disproportionate shortening of the trunk is indicated by a short neck, small chest, and
protuberant abdomen. Skeletal disproportion is usually accompanied
by short stature (length and height below the third percentile); these
measurements are occasionally within the low-­normal range early in
the course of certain conditions.
There may also be disproportionate shortening of different segments of the limbs; the specific pattern can provide clues for diagnoses.
Shortening is greatest in the proximal segments (upper arms and legs)
in achondroplasia; this is termed rhizomelic shortening. Disproportionate shortening of the middle segments (forearms and lower legs)
is called mesomelic shortening; acromelic shortening involves the
hands and feet.
With some exceptions, there is a strong correlation between the age
when shortening is appreciated and the clinical severity of the condition. Many of the lethal neonatal chondrodysplasias are evident during routine fetal ultrasound examinations performed at the end of the
first trimester of gestation (see Table 735.5). Gestational standards exist

for long-­bone lengths, and discrepancies are often detected between
biparietal diameter of the skull and long-­bone lengths. Many disorders
become apparent around the time of birth whereas others manifest
during the first year of life. A number of disorders manifest in early
childhood and a few in late childhood or later.

Non–­Growth-­Related Manifestations

Most patients also have problems unrelated to growth. Skeletal deformities, such as abnormal joint mobility, protuberances at and around
joints, and angular deformities, are common and usually symmetric.
Skeletal abnormalities can adversely affect nonskeletal tissues. Impaired
growth at the base of the skull and of vertebral pedicles reduces the size
of the spinal canal in achondroplasia and can contribute to spinal cord
compression. Short ribs reduce thoracic volume, which can compromise breathing in patients with short trunk chondrodysplasias. Cleft
palate (see Chapter 356) is common to many disorders, presumably
reflecting defective palatal growth.
Manifestations may be unrelated to the skeleton; they reflect
the expression of pathogenic gene variants in nonskeletal tissues. Examples include retinal detachment in spondyloepiphyseal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 735 u General Considerations in Skeletal Dysplasias
Table 735.5  Lethal Neonatal Skeletal Dysplasias
USUALLY FATAL*
Achondrogenesis (different types)
Thanatophoric dysplasia
Short rib polydactyly (different types)
Homozygous achondroplasia
Campomelic dysplasia
Dyssegmental dysplasia, Silverman-­Handmaker type
Osteogenesis imperfecta, type II
Hypophosphatasia (perinatal form)
Chondrodysplasia punctata (rhizomelic form)
OFTEN FATAL
Asphyxiating thoracic dysplasia (Jeune syndrome)
OCCASIONALLY FATAL
Ellis-­van Creveld syndrome
Diastrophic dysplasia
Metatropic dwarfism
Kniest dysplasia
*A few prolonged survivors have been reported in most of these disorders.

Table 735.6  Usually Nonlethal Dwarfing Conditions
Recognizable at Birth or Within the First Few
Months of Life
MOST COMMON
Achondroplasia
Osteogenesis imperfecta (types I, III, IV)
Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita
Diastrophic dysplasia
Ellis-­van Creveld syndrome
LESS COMMON
Chondrodysplasia punctata (some forms)
Kniest dysplasia
Metatropic dysplasia
Langer mesomelic dysplasia

A

B

4337

dysplasia congenita, sex reversal in campomelic dysplasia, congenital heart malformations in Ellis-­van Creveld syndrome, immunodeficiency in cartilage-­hair hypoplasia, and renal dysfunction
in asphyxiating thoracic dysplasia. These nonskeletal problems
provide valuable clues to specific diagnoses and must be managed
clinically (see Table 735.4).

Family and Reproductive History

A family history might identify relatives with the condition, and a
Mendelian inheritance pattern may be elicited. Because the presentation can vary in some disorders within and among families, features
that might be related to the disorder should be identified. Special attention should be given to mild degrees of short stature, disproportion,
deformities, and other manifestations (e.g., precocious osteoarthritis)
because they may be overlooked. Physical examination of relatives may
be useful, as may the review of their photographs, radiographs, and
medical and laboratory records.
A reproductive history might reveal previous stillbirths, fetal losses,
and other abnormal pregnancy outcomes resulting from a skeletal dysplasia. Pregnancy complications, such as polyhydramnios or reduced
fetal movement, are common in bone dysplasias, especially neonatal
lethal variants.
Even though most of the skeletal dysplasias are genetic, it is common for an affected individual to be the first in their family to have the
diagnosis. New pathogenic variants are common for autosomal dominant disorders, especially lethal disorders in the perinatal period (e.g.,
thanatophoric dysplasia, osteogenesis imperfecta). In achondroplasia,
the most common short stature skeletal dysplasia, ∼80% of all individuals have a new pathogenic variant in FGFR3. Germ cell mosaicism,
in which a parent has clones of mutant germ cells, has been observed
in osteogenesis imperfecta, achondroplasia, and in other dominant
disorders. A negative family history is usually seen in recessive disorders unless consanguinity is present. A few of the short stature skeletal
dysplasias are X-­linked in origin. Prenatal diagnosis is available for
disorders that have a known genetic etiology. Appropriateness of the
testing depends on many factors, and genetic counseling is warranted
for these families.

C

D

Fig. 735.2 Radiographic findings in Jansen-­type metaphyseal chondrodysplasia. A, At age 1 yr, there is severe metaphyseal cupping and splaying

at the wrists and also in the hand bones. B, At age 7 yr, there is increasing metaphyseal change at the wrists with enlarged epiphysis; enlarged epiphyses with wide epiphyseal plates are also present in the hands. C, At age 1 yr, there are severe metaphyseal irregularities at the knees and ankles
(femur, tibia, and fibula) and enlarged, rounded epiphyses. D, At age 7 yr, there are severely fragmented, sclerotic metaphyses, wide epiphyseal
plates, and enlarged epiphyses. Radiographic findings in Jansen-­type metaphyseal chondrodysplasia. (From Slovis T, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby, 2008.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4338 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Normal

Epiphsyeal
abnormality

Metaphyseal
abnormality

Diaphyseal
abnormality

Secondary
epiphysis

S. epiphysis

Secondary
epiphysis

Secondary
epiphysis

Metaphysis

Metaphysis

Metaphysis

Metaphysis

Diaphysis

Diaphysis

Diaphysis

Diaphysis

Normal
spondylo-

Spondyloabnormality

Fig. 735.3 Demonstration of the different portions of the appendicu-

Process
Vertebrae

Lamina

Vertebrae

Lamina

Process

Table 735.7  Dynamic Classification of Bone Dysplasias
I.	EPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIAS
A.	Epiphyseal hypoplasias
1.	Failure of articular cartilage: spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia
congenita and tarda
2. Failure of ossification center: multiple epiphyseal dysplasia
congenita and tarda
B. Epiphyseal hyperplasia
1.	Excess of articular cartilage; dysplasia epiphysealis hemimelica
II.	PHYSEAL DYSPLASIAS
A.	Cartilage hypoplasias
1.	Failure of proliferating cartilage: achondroplasia congenita
and tarda
2.	Failure of hypertrophic cartilage: metaphyseal dysostosis
congenita and tarda
B. Cartilage hyperplasias
1.	Excess of proliferating cartilage: hyperchondroplasia
2.	Excess of hypertrophic cartilage: enchondromatosis
III.	METAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIAS
A.	Metaphyseal hypoplasias
1.	Failure to form primary spongiosa: hypophosphatasia
congenita and tarda
2.	Failure to absorb primary spongiosa: osteopetrosis congenita
and tarda
3.	Failure to absorb secondary spongiosa: craniometaphyseal
dysplasia congenita and tarda
B. Metaphyseal hyperplasias
1.	Excessive spongiosa: multiple exostoses
IV.	DIAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIAS
A.	Diaphyseal hypoplasias
1.	Failure of periosteal bone formation: osteogenesis imperfecta
congenita and tarda
2.	Failure of endosteal bone formation: idiopathic osteoporosis
congenita and tarda
B. Diaphyseal hyperplasias
1.	Excessive periosteal bone formation: progressive diaphyseal
dysplasia
2.	Excessive endosteal bone formation: hyperphosphatasemia
From Rubin P. Classification of bone dysplasias. Chicago: Year Book Medical Publishers,
1964. p. 82.

Radiographic Features

Radiographic evaluation for a chondrodysplasia should include plain
films of the entire skeleton. Efforts should be made to identify which
bones and which parts of bones (i.e., epiphyses, metaphyses, diaphyses) are most affected (Figs. 735.3 and Fig. 735.4 and Table 735.7). If

lar skeleton that manifest radiographic abnormalities that aid in the
clinical classification of the skeletal dysplasias. (From Krakow D, Rimoin
DL. The skeletal dysplasias. Genet Med. 2010;12:327–341. Fig. 2.)

possible, films taken at different ages should be examined because the
radiographic changes evolve with time. Films taken before puberty are
generally more informative because pubertal closure of the epiphyses
obliterates many of the signs needed for a radiographic diagnosis. Prenatal diagnosis may also be possible with fetal ultrasound.

DIAGNOSIS

If an infant or child is short with disproportionate features, a diagnosis is established by matching the observed clinical picture (defined
primarily from clinical, family, and gestational histories; physical
examination; and radiographic evaluation) with clinical phenotypes of well-­documented disorders. A number of reference texts
and online databases provide information about the disorders and
comprehensive lists of current references (http://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/books/NBK1116/). Consultation with experts in medical
genetics, orthopedics, endocrinology, or the bone dysplasia field is
recommended.
Genetic testing for chondrodysplasias is very useful, especially for
disorders in which recurrent pathogenic variants occur (typical achondroplasia has the same FGFR3 pathogenic variant). Pathogenic variant testing for achondroplasia is available, although the diagnosis can
be made clinically. The greatest utility for testing may be for prenatal
diagnosis for couples where both parents have typical (heterozygous)
achondroplasia. Their children are at a 25% risk of the much more
severe homozygous achondroplasia (also known as double dominant),
which can be detected by pathogenic variant analysis. Preimplantation
genetic testing can be used to identify zygotes with two pathogenic
variants in FGFR3. Another example of the utility of genetic testing is
in disorders resulting from pathogenic variants in DTDST. These disorders are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner, and a limited
number of mutant alleles have been found. If the pathogenic variants
are identified in the patient, they should be detectable in the parents
and potentially used for prenatal diagnosis. Pathogenic variant analysis is commercially available for many of the skeletal dysplasias and
is increasingly used to confirm clinical diagnosis and for future pregnancy planning.
Many of the chondrodysplasias have distinct histologic changes of
the skeletal growth plate. Sometimes, such tissues obtained at biopsy
or discarded from a surgical procedure are helpful diagnostically. It is
uncommon to make a diagnosis histologically if it was not already suspected on clinical or radiographic grounds.

MOLECULAR GENETICS OF SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS

A number of chondrodysplasia genes have been identified (see Table
735.2). They encode several categories of proteins, including cartilage
matrix proteins, transmembrane receptors, ion transporters, and transcription factors. The number of identified gene loci is smaller than
anticipated from the number of recognized clinical phenotypes. The
majority of patients have disorders that map to fewer than 10 loci, and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 735 u General Considerations in Skeletal Dysplasias
Pathognomonic findings
• Osteoporosis, bowing, fracture  Osteogenesis imperfecta family
• Punctate calcifications  Punctata family
• Sclerotic bones  Osteopetrosis (generalized) or Focal sclerosing dysplasia
• Undermodeling, bowing  Otopalatodigital syndrome family (Filaminopathy A)

Suspected skeletal dysplasia

Spinal involvement

Dysostosis
multiplex

Interpediculate
distance
narrowing,
Trident ilia,
Proximal femoral
scooping

Severe
platyspondyly,
Overfaced
pedicles

No spinal involvement

Moderate
platyspondyly

Coronal cle fts,
Dumbbell
deformity of long
bones

Mucopolysaccharidosis and
mucolipidosis

Achondroplasia
family

Metatropic
dysplasia (TRPV4)
family

4339

Type II and XI
Collagenopathy
Stickler-Kniest
family

Pear-shaped
vertebral bodies,
Delayed
ossification of
juxtatruncal
bones

Type II
Collagenopathy
SEDC family

Short ribs

Epiphyseal
ossification
delayed and
irregular

Metaphyseal
irregularity

Cervical kyphosis,
Distal humeral
tapering

Skeletal
ciliopathies

Multiple
epiphyseal
dysplasia family

Skeletal
ribosomopathy
family

Joint contractures

Joint dislocations

Diastrophic
dysplasia family

Larsen syndrome
family
(Filaminopathy B)

Fig. 735.4 Diagnostic algorithm for the major skeletal dysplasias. TRPV4, transient receptor potential vanilloid 4. (From Handa A, Grigelioniene G,
Nishimura G: Skeletal dysplasia families: a stepwise approach to diagnosis. RadioGraphics 2023;43(5), Fig. 1.)

pathogenic variants at two loci (COL2A1 and FGFR3) account for more
than half of all cases. There may be a limited number of genes whose
function is critical to skeletal development, especially linear bone
growth, and pathogenic variants in these genes give rise to a wide range
of chondrodysplasia clinical phenotypes. New genes harboring pathogenic variants that cause chondrodysplasias continue to be identified
with advances in technology.
Pathogenic variants of COL2A1 and FGFR3 illustrate different
genetic characteristics. COL2A1 pathogenic variants are distributed
throughout the gene, with few instances of recurrence in unrelated
persons. In contrast, FGFR3 pathogenic variants are restricted to a
few locations within the gene, and the occurrence of new pathogenic
variants at these same sites in unrelated persons is the rule. There is a
strong correlation between clinical phenotype and pathogenic variant
site for FGFR3, but not COL2A1.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

Chondrodysplasias are caused by pathogenic variants in genes that
encode abnormal proteins and disrupt normal endochondral ossification, the biologic process responsible for the development and
linear growth of the skeleton (see Fig. 735.1). These genetic variants
act through different mechanisms. Most pathogenic variants involving cartilage matrix proteins cause disease when only one of the two
copies (alleles) of the relevant gene is mutated. These pathogenic variants usually act through a dominant negative mechanism in which the
protein products of the mutant allele interfere with the assembly and
function of multimeric molecules that contain the protein products
of both the normal and mutant alleles. The type II collagen molecule
is a triple helix composed of three collagen chains, which are the
products of the type II collagen gene COL2A1. When chains from
both normal and mutant alleles are combined to form triple helices,
most molecules contain at least one mutant chain. It is not known
how many mutant chains are required to produce a dysfunctional
molecule, but, depending on the pathogenic variant, it theoretically
could be as few as one.

Pathogenic variants in the gene encoding type X collagen differ
from the model above. They map to the region of the chain that is
responsible for chain recognition; the chains must recognize each
other before they can assemble into collagen molecules. Disease-­
causing variants are thought to disrupt this process. As a result, none
of the mutant chains are incorporated into molecules. This mechanism
is haploinsufficiency because the products of the mutant allele are functionally absent, and the normal allele is insufficient for normal function. Genetic variants involving ion transport genes also act through
a loss of function of the transporters. Pathogenic variants of transmembrane receptors studied to date appear to act through a gain of
function; the mutant receptors initiate signals in a constitutive manner
independent of their normal ligands. A pathogenic variant in FGFR3
is another example of a gain of function mechanism of disease. At baseline, FGFR3 is a negative regulator of endochondral bone formation.
If the pathogenic variant associated with achondroplasia is present in
this gene, the clinical manifestations of this condition are caused by
enhanced inhibition of endochondral bone formation and growth,
independent of normal ligands.

TREATMENT

The first step is to establish the correct diagnosis. This allows one to
provide a prognosis and to anticipate the medical and surgical problems associated with a particular disorder. Establishing a diagnosis
helps to distinguish between lethal disorders and nonlethal disorders
in a premature or newborn infant (see Tables 735.5 and 735.6). A poor
prognosis for long-­term survival might argue against initiating extreme
lifesaving measures for thanatophoric dysplasia or achondrogenesis
types Ib or II, whereas such measures may be indicated for infants
with spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita or diastrophic dysplasia,
which have a good prognosis if the infant survives the newborn period.
Overall, management of patients with short stature skeletal dysplasias is directed at preventing and correcting skeletal deformities (spinal
stenosis, kyphosis, scoliosis), treating nonskeletal complications (other
anomalies, immunodeficiencies), providing genetic counseling, and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4340 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
helping patients and families learn to cope. Each disorder has its own
unique set of problems, and consequently, management must be tailored to each disorder.
There are a number of problems common to many chondrodysplasias for which general recommendations can be made. Children with
most chondrodysplasias should avoid contact sports and other activities that cause injury or stress to joints. Good dietary habits should
be established in childhood to prevent or minimize obesity in adulthood. Dental care should be started early to minimize the crowding
and malalignment of teeth. Children and relatives should be given the
opportunity to participate in support groups, such as the Little People
of America (http://www.lpaonline.org) and Human Growth Foundation (http://www.hgfound.org).
Three controversial approaches have been used to increase bone length.
Surgical limb lengthening has been employed for a few disorders. Its greatest success has been in achondroplasia in which nonskeletal tissues tend
to be redundant and easily stretched. The procedure is usually performed
during adolescence. Pharmacologic doses of human growth hormone
comparable to those used to treat Turner syndrome have also been tried
in several disorders; the results have been equivocal. Animal studies suggest that C-­type natriuretic peptide (CNP) promotes linear bone growth
in achondroplasia. One CNP analogue (vosoritide) is approved to increase
height in children with achondroplasia (≥5 years old) before the growth
plates are closed. Palovarotene is undergoing clinical trials for fibrodysplasia
ossificans and resveratrol for pseudoachondroplasia. Enzyme replacement
therapy is available for hypophosphatasia and Morquio A syndrome. Many
new therapies are based on the gene or pathway involved in the specific
disease (see Chapters 736-742). Clinicaltrials.gov is a resource to access
information about these and all other clinical trials.

epiphyses, the extent of which corresponds with clinical severity.
Most of the SEDs result from heterozygous pathogenic variants of
COL2A1 and are autosomal dominant disorders. The pathogenic
variants are dispersed throughout the gene with imperfect correlation between the variant location and resultant clinical phenotype.
Molecular testing/confirmation is readily available commercially.
Prenatal diagnosis is possible if the pathogenic variant is known.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

The Kniest dysplasia variant of SED manifests at birth with a short
trunk and limbs associated with a flat face, prominent eyes, enlarged
joints, cleft palate, and clubfoot (Fig. 736.1). Radiographs show
vertebral defects and short tubular bones with epiphyseal irregularities and metaphyseal enlargement that gives rise to a dumbbell
appearance.
Motor development is often delayed because of the joint deformities, although intelligence is normal. Hearing loss and myopia
commonly develop during childhood, and retinal detachment
is a common complication. Joint enlargement progresses during childhood and becomes painful. It is accompanied by flexion
contractures and muscle atrophy, which may be incapacitating by
adolescence.

Chapter 736

Disorders Involving
Cartilage Matrix Proteins
Daniah Albokhari and Julie E. Hoover-­Fong
Disorders of cartilage matrix proteins resulting in bone and joint
disorders can be classified according to the defective proteins: collagens (types 2, 9, 10, 11) and the noncollagenous proteins COMP
(cartilage oligomeric matrix protein), matrilin-3, and aggrecan. The
clinical phenotypes and clinical severity differ between and within
the groups, especially the spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia (SED) group,
which is made up largely of type collagenopathies (see also Table
735.1).

TYPE 2 COLLAGENOPATHIES

The term spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia refers to a heterogeneous
group of disorders characterized by shortening of the trunk and,
to a lesser extent, the limbs. Severity ranges from most severe and
often lethal perinatally, such as achondrogenesis type II, hypochondrogenesis, and platyspondylic dysplasia, Torrance type, to severe/
moderately severe neonatal presentation, such as Kniest dysplasia
(which is apparent at birth and usually nonlethal) and SED congenita, to mild SED with premature-­onset arthrosis (which might not be
detected until adolescence or later) (Table 736.1). The radiographic
hallmarks are abnormal development of the vertebral bodies and of

Lethal Spondyloepiphyseal Dysplasias

Achondrogenesis type II is characterized by severe shortening of the
neck and trunk and especially the limbs, and by a large, soft head. Fetal
hydrops and prematurity are common, and infants are stillborn or die
shortly after birth. Hypochondrogenesis refers to a clinical phenotype
intermediate between achondrogenesis type II and SED congenita.
It is typically lethal in the newborn period. Platyspondylic dysplasia, Torrance type is characterized by disproportionate short stature,
short limbs, and coarse facial features. The majority of infants die at or
shortly after birth.
The severity of radiographic changes correlates with clinical severity. These conditions manifest short, broad tubular bones with cupped
metaphyses. The cranial bones are not well mineralized, and the vertebral bodies are poorly ossified in the entire spine in achondrogenesis
type II, and in the cervical and sacral spine in hypochondrogenesis. In
both conditions, the pelvic bones are hypoplastic, and the pedicles are
ossified. In Torrance type, the platyspondyly is strikingly severe, with
iliac hypoplasia, short sacrosciatic notches, and preserved ossification
of the pubic bones. The three types can be detected prenatally and confirmed by molecular testing.

KNIEST DYSPLASIA

Spondyloepiphyseal Dysplasia Congenita

The phenotype of this group, SED congenita, is apparent at birth.
The hands and feet are usually normal. Craniofacial features may
present, including malar hypoplasia, hypertelorism, and cleft palate. The neck is short, and the chest is barrel shaped (Fig. 736.2).
Kyphosis and exaggeration of the normal lumbar lordosis are common. The proximal segments of the limbs are shorter than the
hands and feet, which often appear normal. Some infants have clubfoot and/or exhibit hypotonia.
Skeletal radiographs of the newborn reveal short tubular bones,
delayed ossification of vertebral bodies, and proximal limb bone epiphyses (Fig. 736.3). Hypoplasia of the odontoid process, a short, square
pelvis with a poorly ossified symphysis pubis, and mild irregularity of
metaphyses are apparent.
Infants usually have normal developmental milestones with a waddling gait typically appearing in early childhood. Childhood complications include respiratory compromise from tracheomalacia, spinal
deformities, and spinal cord compression because of cervicomedullary
instability. The disproportion and shortening become progressively
worse with age, and adult heights range from 95-128 cm. Myopia is
typical; adults are predisposed to retinal detachment. Precocious
osteoarthritis (OA) occurs in early adulthood and requires surgical
joint replacement.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 736 u Disorders Involving Cartilage Matrix Proteins

4341

Mild Spondyloepiphyseal Dysplasia with Premature-­
Onset Arthrosis

Table 736.1  Collagen Disorders
DISORDER

INHERITANCE

GENE

TYPE 2 COLLAGEN DISORDERS
Achondrogenesis (formerly type 2,
type Langer-Saldino)

AD

COL2A1

Hypochondrogenesis

AD

COL2A1

Platyspondylic dysplasia, type
Torrance

AD

COL2A1

Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia
congenita

AD, AR

COL2A1

Spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia

AD

COL2A1

Kniest dysplasia

AD

COL2A1

Spondyloperipheral dysplasia

AD

COL2A1

SED with metatarsal shortening

AD

COL2A1

Stickler syndrome

AD

COL2A1

Dysplasia of the proximal femoral
epiphyses

AD

COL2A1

TYPE 11 COLLAGEN DISORDERS
Stickler syndrome

AD, MOS

COL11A1

Marshall syndrome

AS

COL11A1

Stickler syndrome (nonocular type)

AD

COL11A2

Fibrochondrogenesis

AR, AD

COL11A1

Fibrochondrogenesis

AR, AD

COL11A2

Otospondylomegaepiphyseal
dysplasia

AR

COL11A2

Otospondylomegaepiphyseal
dysplasia

AD

COL11A2

Data from Unger S, Ferreira CR, Mortier GR, et al. Nosology of genetic skeletal disorders: 2023 revision. Am J Med Genet. 2023;191A:1164-1209 (Table 1, Group 2 and 3, pp
1166-1167).

Late-­onset SED is a mild clinical phenotype characterized by slightly
short stature, progressive joint pain, and diminished range of movement, associated with mild epiphyseal and vertebral abnormalities
on radiographs. It is typically detected during childhood or adolescence but can go unrecognized until adulthood when precocious OA
appears. The vision and hearing are usually normal. This designation
is nosologically distinct from SED tarda, which is clinically similar but results from pathogenic variant of the X-­linked gene SEDL
(TRAPPC2).

Stickler Syndrome/Dysplasia (Hereditary Progressive
Arthro-­Ophthalmopathy)

Short stature is not a feature of Stickler dysplasia. This condition resembles SED because of its joint and eye manifestations.
Pathogenic variants of genes encoding type II (COL2A1), type XI
(COL11A1, COL11A2), and type IX (COL9A1, COL9A2, COL9A3)
collagens have been identified in Stickler-­like disorders. Stickler
dysplasia is often identified in the newborn because of cleft palate and micrognathia (Pierre Robin anomaly; see Chapter 357). Of
patients with Stickler syndrome, 25% have Pierre Robin anomaly,
and 18% of patients with Pierre Robin anomaly have Stickler syndrome. Children with Stickler syndrome are often identified in
craniofacial clinics. Infants typically have severe myopia and additional ophthalmologic complications, including cataracts, glaucoma, and choroidoretinal and vitreous degeneration, with retinal
detachment common during childhood requiring multiple surgical interventions (Fig. 736.4). Special attention must be given to
eye complications even in childhood to preserve vision for these
individuals. Hearing loss is a common feature that arises during
adolescence. Sensorineural hearing loss is the most common form;
however, conductive hearing loss may also be seen. Osteoarticular
manifestations include joint hypermobility (especially hip), which
resolves in adulthood, metaphyseal broadening of the femoral
neck, hypoplastic iliac wings, Schmorl nodes, muscle hypotonia,
metaphyseal-­epiphyseal dysplasia, precocious progressive OA of
the spine and peripheral joints (which may require hip replacement
surgery before age 30 years), and decreased bone density. Similar
manifestations may be seen in other diseases with pathogenic variants in type II and XI collagen genes (Table 736.2).

PSEUDOACHONDROPLASIA AND MULTIPLE
EPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA

Fig. 736.1 Patient with Kniest dysplasia. The trunk is short, the epi-

physes are broad, and there is contracture of the fingers. (From Traboulsi EI. Skeletal and connective tissue disorders with anterior segment
manifestations. In Krachmer JH, Mannis MJ, Holland EJ, eds. Cornea,
3rd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2011. Fig. 60.9.)

Pseudoachondroplasia and the most common form of multiple
epiphyseal dysplasia (MED) are two distinct phenotypes that are
grouped together because they result from pathogenic variants of
the gene encoding COMP. The pathogenic variants are heterozygous in both, and they are autosomal dominant traits. The clinical phenotypes are restricted to musculoskeletal tissues. Newborns
with pseudoachondroplasia are average in size and appearance. Gait
abnormalities and short stature mainly affect the limbs and become
apparent in late infancy. Short stature becomes marked as the child
grows and is associated with generalized joint laxity (Fig. 736.5).
The hands are short, broad, and deviated in an ulnar direction; the
forearms are bowed. Developmental milestones and intelligence
are usually normal. Lumbar lordosis and deformities of the knee
develop during childhood; the latter often requires surgical correction. Pain is common in weight-­bearing joints during childhood
and adolescence, and OA develops late in the second decade of life,
which may require hip replacement by mid-30s. Adult height ranges
from 105-128 cm. Skeletal radiographs show distinctive abnormalities of vertebral bodies and of both epiphyses and metaphyses of
tubular bones (Fig. 736.6).
The MED phenotype has skeletal abnormalities that predominantly affect the epiphyses as noted on radiographs. Two forms, the
severe Fairbank type and the mild Ribbing type, are no longer used
in classification. Because of overlap in clinical features, and because
COMP pathogenic variants are found in both types, they are now
considered part of a clinical spectrum. The more severe clinical

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4342 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

Fig. 736.2 Spondyloepiphyseal dys-

A

B

C

plasia congenita is shown in infancy
(A) and early childhood (B, C). Note
the short extremities, relatively normal
hands, flat facies, and exaggerated lordosis.

Fig. 736.3 Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia. Platyspondyly, delayed epiphyseal ossification (especially femoral heads), dens hypoplasia. (From Campeau P, Schlesinger AE. Skeletal dysplasias. [Updated 2017 Jan 30]. In: De Groot LJ, Chrousos G, Dungan K, et al., eds. Endotext [internet]. South
Dartmouth, MA, 2000, MDText.com, Inc. Fig. 5. Available from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK279130/.)

phenotype of MED has its onset during childhood, with mild short-­
limbed short stature, pain in weight-­bearing joints, and a waddling
gait. Radiographs show delayed and irregular ossification of epiphyses. A typical finding is the double-­layered patella (pathognomonic).
In more mildly affected patients, the disorder might not be recognized until adolescence or adulthood. Radiographic changes may
be limited to the capital femoral epiphyses. In the latter case, mild
MED must be distinguished from bilateral Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease (see Chapter 719.3). Precocious OA of hips and knees is the
major complication in adults with MED. Adult heights range from
136-151 cm.
There are families with clinical and radiographic manifestations of MED
that are not caused by pathogenic variants of COMP. Pathogenic variants
in the genes encoding all three of the type IX collagen chains have been

reported. It has been suggested that COMP and type IX collagen interact
functionally in cartilage matrix, thus explaining why pathogenic variants
of different genes produce similar pictures. Pathogenic variants of the
genes coding for another cartilage matrix protein, matrilin-3 (MATN3),
and the diastrophic dysplasia sulfate transporter (SLC26A) have also been
found in patients with autosomal dominant and recessive MED, respectively. For familial cases of pseudoachondroplasia and MED resulting
from pathogenic variant in COMP, prenatal diagnosis is available.

Spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia, Borochowitz-­
Cormier-­Daire type

Spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia, Borochowitz-­Cormier-­Daire type
is a rare more severe spondylo-­epi-­metaphyseal dysplasia (SEMD)-­
like phenotype characterized by short-­
limb dwarfism with spinal,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Daughter

Mother

Fig. 736.4 Face and profile of a mother
and daughter with Stickler syndrome type I.
Note in the daughter the flat nasal bridge,
the mild epicanthal folds, and discrete micrognathia. At first sight, the mother shows no
clear facial characteristics of Stickler syndrome.
(From Baijens LWJ, De Leenheer EMR, Weekamp HH, et al. Stickler syndrome type I and
Stapes ankylosis. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2004;68:1573–1580. Fig. 2.)
Table 736.2  Other Genetic Diseases Associated with
Pathogenic Variants in Type II and Type XI
Collagen Genes, with Clinical Presentations
Similar to That of Stickler Syndrome
PHENOTYPES ASSOCIATED WITH COL2A1 PATHOGENIC
VARIANTS
Achondrogenesis type II
Hypochondrogenesis
Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita
Spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia, Strudwick type
Kniest dysplasia
Platyspondylic skeletal dysplasia, Torrance type
Spondyloperipheral dysplasia
Czech dysplasia
Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia, Stanescu type
Dysplasia with altered vertebral contours
Some of the juvenile joint diseases
PHENOTYPES ASSOCIATED WITH COL11A1 PATHOGENIC
VARIANTS
Marshall syndrome
Fibrochondrogenesis 1
Autosomal dominant deafness
PHENOTYPES ASSOCIATED WITH COL11A2 PATHOGENIC
VARIANTS
Otospondylometaphyseal dysplasia
Weissenbacher-­Zweymüller syndrome
Fibrochondrogenesis 2
Some cases of isolated sensorineural deafness
Table adapted from Couchouron T, Masson C. Early-­onset progressive osteoarthritis
with hereditary progressive ophthalmology or Stickler syndrome. Joint Bone Spine.
2011;78:45–49. Table 1, p. 48; with additional data from Mortier GR, Cohn DH,
Cormier-­Daire V, et al. Nosology and classification of genetic skeletal disorders: 2019
revision. Am J Med Genet A. 2019;179(12):2393–2419.

A

B

Fig. 736.5 Pseudoachondroplasia in an adolescent male. A, The facies and head circumference are normal. There is shortening of all extremities and bowing of the lower extremities. B, Photograph of hands,
demonstrating short stubby fingers.
epiphyseal, and metaphyseal abnormalities. There are only three families described in the literature caused by autosomal recessive pathogenic variant in the gene encoding matrilin-3 (MATN3). Radiographic
examination showed flat, ovoid vertebral bodies, short with a stocky
appearance, long tubular bones, wide metaphysis with lateral spurs,
irregular epiphysis of knee, unossified proximal femur epiphysis,
squaring of pelvis, and narrow greater sciatic notch.

SCHMID METAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA

Schmid metaphyseal dysplasia is one of several chondrodysplasias
in which metaphyseal abnormalities dominate the radiographic features. It typically manifests in early childhood with mild short stature, bowing of the legs, and a waddling gait (Fig. 736.7). Joints, such
as the wrist, may be enlarged. Radiographs show flaring and irregular
mineralization of the metaphyses of tubular bones of the proximal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4344 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

A

B

Fig. 736.6 A, Lateral thoracolumbar spine radiograph of a patient

with pseudoachondroplasia showing central protrusion (tonguing) of
the anterior aspect of upper lumbar and lower thoracic vertebrae. Note
reduced vertebral body heights (platyspondyly) and secondary lordosis.
B, Lower-­extremity radiograph of a patient with pseudoachondroplasia
showing large metaphyses, poorly formed epiphyses, and marked bowing of the long bones.

Fig. 736.8 Radiograph of lower extremities in Schmid metaphyseal

dysplasia showing short tubular bones and metaphyseal flaring and irregularities, abnormal capital femoral epiphyses, and femoral necks.
The epiphyses are normal. Coxa vara is present.

in the gene encoding type X collagen (COL10A1) as an autosomal
dominant condition. The distribution of type X collagen is restricted
to the region of growing bone in which cartilage is converted into
bone. This might explain why radiographic changes are confined to
the metaphyses.

Aggrecan-­Related Spondyloepiphyseal Dysplasias

Fig. 736.7 Female patient with metaphyseal dysplasia, type Schmid.

The facies are normal, and the stature is mildly reduced. Mild tibia vara
is present.

limbs (Fig. 736.8). Coxa vara is usually present and can require surgical correction. Short stature becomes more evident with age and
affects the lower extremities more than the upper extremities. Overall, manifestations are limited to the skeleton. Schmid metaphyseal
chondrodysplasia is caused by heterozygous pathogenic variants

Pathogenic variants of aggrecan have been detected in three SED-­
like conditions. SED-­Kimberley is relatively mild, with short stature, stocky build, and early-­
onset OA of weight-­
bearing joints.
Autosomal dominant pathogenic variants are etiologic. Autosomal
recessive pathogenic variants cause a more severe and generalized
clinical phenotype, spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia–aggrecan
type. Radiographic changes include irregular epiphyses and widened
metaphyses. A mild condition, familial osteochondritis dissecans,
is characterized by multiple osteochondritic lesions (separation of
cartilage and subchondral bone from the surrounding tissue and primarily affecting the knee, ankle, and elbow joints) in knees and/or
hips and/or elbows, disproportionate short stature, and early-­onset
OA. Autosomal dominant pathogenic variants have been found in
familial cases.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 737 u Disorders Involving Transmembrane Receptors 4345

Chapter 737

Disorders Involving
Transmembrane Receptors
Daniah Albokhari and Julie E. Hoover-­Fong
Heterozygous pathogenic variants of genes encoding FGFR3 (fibroblast
growth factor receptor 3) and PTHR1 (parathyroid hormone-1 receptor) result in disorders involving transmembrane receptors. The pathogenic variants cause the receptors to become activated in the absence
of physiologic ligands, which accentuates normal receptor function of
negatively regulating bone growth. The pathogenic variants act by gain
of negative function. In the FGFR3 pathogenic variant group, in which
the clinical phenotypes range from severe to mild, the severity appears
to correlate with the extent to which the receptor is activated. PTHR1
and especially FGFR3 pathogenic variants tend to recur in unrelated
individuals (Table 737.1; see also Table 735.1).

FGFR3 CHONDRODYSPLASIA GROUP

The achondroplasia group represents a substantial percentage of
patients with chondrodysplasias and contains thanatophoric dysplasia
(TD), the most common lethal chondrodysplasia, with a birth prevalence of 1 in 35,000 births and achondroplasia, the most common nonlethal chondrodysplasia, with a birth prevalence of 1 in 15,000–25,000
births. Also in this group are severe achondroplasia with developmental delay and acanthosis nigricans (SADDAN), hypochondroplasia,
and camptodactyly, tall stature, and hearing loss syndrome (CATSHL).
All five have pathogenic variants in a small number of locations in the
FGFR3 gene. There is a strong correlation between the pathogenic variant site and the clinical phenotype.

Thanatophoric Dysplasia

Table 737.1

 

TD manifests before or at birth. In the former situation, ultrasonographic examination in mid-­
gestation or later reveals a large
head and very short limbs; the pregnancy is often accompanied by
FGFR3 Chondrodysplasia Group

GROUP/NAME OF
DISORDER

INHERITANCE

OMIM

GENE

Thanatophoric dysplasia
type I (TD I)

AD

187600

FGFR3

Thanatophoric dysplasia
type II (TD II)

AD

187601

FGFR3

Severe achondroplasia
with developmental
delay and acanthosis
nigricans (SADDAN)

AD

616482

FGFR3

Achondroplasia

AD

100800

FGFR3

Hypochondroplasia

AD

146000

FGFR3

Camptodactyly, tall
stature, and hearing
loss syndrome
(CATSHL)

AD

610474

FGFR3

Please also refer to group 33 from Mortier et al nosology for craniosynostoses
syndromes linked to FGFR3 pathogenic variants, as well as LADD syndrome in group
41 for another FGFR3-­related phenotype.
OMIM, Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (omim.org).
From Campeau P, Schlesinger AE: Skeletal dysplasias. [Updated 2017 Jan 30]. In: De
Groot LJ, Chrousos G, Dungan K, et al. (eds). Endotext [internet]. South Dartmouth,
MA, 2000, MDText.com, Inc. Available from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/N
BK279130/.

polyhydramnios and premature delivery. Very short limbs, short
neck, long narrow thorax, and large head with midfacial hypoplasia
dominate the clinical phenotype at birth (Fig. 737.1). The cloverleaf
skull deformity known as kleeblattschädel is sometimes found. If the
affected fetus survives pregnancy, the newborn will have severe respiratory distress because of the small thorax. Although this distress can
be treated by intense respiratory care, the long-­term prognosis is poor.
Skeletal radiographs distinguish two slightly different forms called
TD I and TD II. In the more common TD I, radiographs show large
calvarium with a small cranial base, marked thinning and flattening
of vertebral bodies (platyspondyly) visualized best on lateral view,
very short ribs, severe hypoplasia of pelvic bones, and very short and
bowed tubular bones with flared metaphyses (Fig. 737.2). The femurs
are curved and shaped like a telephone receiver. TD II differs mainly in
that there are longer and straighter femurs.
The TD II clinical phenotype is associated with pathogenic variants
that map to codon 650 of FGFR3, causing the substitution of a lysine
with glutamic acid. This activates the tyrosine kinase activity of a receptor that transmits signals to intracellular pathways. The pathogenic
variant of the same lysine 650 to methionine is also associated with
a clinical phenotype intermediate between TD and achondroplasia,
referred to as SADDAN (severe achondroplasia with developmental delay and acanthosis nigricans), where affected cases often do not
require ventilatory support and survive beyond infancy. Pathogenic
variants of the TD I phenotype mainly map to two regions in the extracellular domain of the receptor, where they substitute cysteine residues
for other amino acids. Free cysteine residues are thought to form disulfide bonds promoting dimerization of receptor molecules, leading to
activation and signal transmission. TD I and TD II typically present as
new pathogenic variants in offspring born to unaffected, average stature parents. The recurrence risk is low. Because the variant codons in
TD are pathogenic for unknown reasons and because of the theoretical
risk of germ cell mosaicism, parents are offered prenatal diagnosis for
subsequent pregnancies.

Achondroplasia

Achondroplasia is the prototype chondrodysplasia. It typically
manifests at birth with short limbs, a long narrow trunk, and a
large head with midfacial hypoplasia and prominent forehead
(Fig. 737.3). The limb shortening is greatest in the proximal segments
(rhizomelia), and the fingers often display a trident configuration.
Most joints are hyperextensible, but extension is restricted at the elbow.
A thoracolumbar gibbus is typically found in newborns but improves
as they start walking with no intervention in 90% of the cases. Birth
length may be slightly less than normal but often plots within the low-­
normal range.

Diagnosis

Skeletal radiographs confirm the diagnosis (Fig. 737.4; see also Fig.
737.3). The calvarial bones are large, whereas the cranial base and facial
bones are small. The vertebral pedicles are short throughout the spine
as noted on a lateral radiograph. The interpedicular distance, which
normally increases from the first to the fifth lumbar vertebra, decreases
in achondroplasia. The iliac bones are short and round, and the acetabular roofs are flat. The tubular bones are short with mildly irregular and
flared metaphyses. The fibula is disproportionately long compared with
the tibia, which is often bowed, causing genu varum.

Clinical Manifestations

Infants usually exhibit delayed motor milestones, often not walking
alone until 18-24 months. This is because of hypotonia and mechanical
difficulty balancing the large head on a normal-­sized trunk and short
extremities. Intelligence is normal unless central nervous system complications develop. As the child begins to walk, the gibbus usually gives
way to an exaggerated lumbar lordosis.
Infants and children with achondroplasia progressively fall below
normal standards for length and height. They can be plotted against
standards established for achondroplasia. Adult heights typically are
118-145 cm for men and 112-136 cm for women. C-­type natriuretic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4346 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

A

Fig. 737.1 Identical twins with type I thanatophoric dysplasia. Disproportionately large head, bell-­shaped chest, and micromelia. (From
Gilbert-­Barness E, Kapur RP, Oligny LL, Siebert JR, eds. Potter’s Pathology of the Fetus, Infant and Child, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2007.
Fig. 20-47.)

B

C

Fig. 737.3 Achondroplasia phenotype at different ages. A, Infant

Fig. 737.2 Thanatophoric dysplasia type I. Severe platyspondyly,

very short ribs, narrow thorax, short broad pelvis, large skull, very
short and bent long bones. (From Campeau P, Schlesinger AE. Skeletal dysplasias. [Updated 2017 Jan 30]. In De Groot LJ, Chrousos G,
Dungan K, et al., eds. Endotext [internet]. South Dartmouth, MA, 2000,
MDText.com, Inc., Fig. 1. Available from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
/books/NBK279130/.)

peptide analogue (vosoritide), administered as a daily subcutaneous
injection is the first approved treatment for children ≥5 years of age
with achondroplasia; treatment with vosoritide produced an increase
of annual growth velocity with no significant side effect. In addition,
vosoritide maintains this annual growth velocity up to 2 years along
with an improvement in body segment proportion. Clinical trials are
underway to study other compounds such as soluble FGFR3 decoy
receptors, and tyrosine kinase inhibitors, which may restore bone
growth in achondroplasia based on studies in animal models. Other
possible future treatments of achondroplasia include fibroblast growth
factor aptamers and meclizine, which showed improvement of the
skeletal phenotype of the mutant mice. Surgical limb lengthening and
human growth hormone treatment have been used to increase height;
however, both are controversial.
Virtually all infants and children with achondroplasia have large
heads, although only a fraction have true hydrocephalus. Head circumference should be carefully monitored using standards developed for
achondroplasia, as should neurologic function in general. The spinal
canal is stenotic, and spinal cord compression can occur at the foramen
magnum and in the lumbar spine. The former usually occurs in infants
and small children and may be associated with hypotonia, failure to

with achondroplasia with macrocephaly, frontal bossing, midface hypoplasia, small chest, rhizomelic shortening of all the limbs, redundant
skinfolds, and extreme joint laxity. Note the trident hand with short fingers and abducted hips. B, Typical radiographic findings from a child
with achondroplasia. All of the tubular bones are short, but the fibula
is relatively long compared with the tibia. There is protrusion of the
epiphysis into the metaphysis of the distal femur, creating the chevron deformity, and—to a lesser extent—of the proximal tibia. The iliac
bones are rounded, the acetabular roof is horizontal, and the sacrosciatic notches are small. C, A 3-­yr-­old with achondroplasia with the
typical features shown in (A). Note that the redundant skinfolds are no
longer present and that joint laxity has improved. Rhizomelic shortening of the extremities is more pronounced and accompanied by tibial
bowing. (From Horton WA, Hall JG, Hecht JT. Achondroplasia. Lancet.
2007;370:162–172.)

thrive, quadriparesis, central and obstructive apnea, and sudden death.
Surgical correction may be required for severe stenosis. Lumbar spinal stenosis usually does not occur until early adulthood. Symptoms
include paresthesias, numbness, and claudication in the legs. Loss of
bladder and bowel control may be late complications. Bowing of the
legs is common in patients with achondroplasia and might need to be
corrected surgically. Other common problems include dental crowding, articulation difficulties, obesity, and frequent episodes of otitis
media, which can contribute to hearing loss.

Genetics

All patients with typical achondroplasia have pathogenic variants at
FGFR3 codon 380. This pathogenic variant is located in the transmembrane domain of the receptor and is thought to stabilize receptor dimers that enhance receptor signals, the consequences of which
inhibit linear bone growth. Achondroplasia behaves as an autosomal
dominant condition; most cases arise from a new pathogenic variant to
average stature parents.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 738 u Disorders Involving Ion Transporters

4347

irregular growth of vertebrae. Intelligence is normal, although there
may be hearing loss.
Jansen metaphyseal chondrodysplasia is caused by activating pathogenic variants of PTHR1. This G-­
protein–coupled transmembrane
receptor serves as a receptor for both parathyroid hormone and parathyroid hormone-­
related peptide. Signaling through this receptor
serves as a brake on the terminal differentiation of cartilage cells at a
critical step in bone growth. Because the pathogenic variants activate
the receptor, they enhance the braking effect and thereby slow bone
growth. In contrast, loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants of PTHR1 are
observed in Blomstrand chondrodysplasia, whose clinical features are
the mirror image of Jansen metaphyseal chondrodysplasia.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 737.4 Achondroplasia. Small rounded iliac bones, horizon-

tal acetabula, decreasing interpediculate distance, normal vertebral
body height, short ribs. (From Campeau P, Schlesinger AE. Skeletal
dysplasias. [Updated 2017 Jan 30]. In De Groot LJ, Chrousos G, Dungan K, et al., eds. Endotext [internet]. South Dartmouth, MA, 2000,
MDText.com, Inc., Fig. 2. Available from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.go
v/books/NBK279130/.)

Because of the high frequency of achondroplasia among short stature skeletal dysplasias, it is relatively common for adults with achondroplasia to marry. Such couples have a 50% risk of transmitting their
condition, heterozygous achondroplasia, to each offspring, as well as a
25% risk of homozygous achondroplasia. The latter condition exhibits intermediate severity between TD and heterozygous achondroplasia
and is usually lethal in the newborn period and is often referred to as
“double dominant” inheritance. Prenatal diagnosis is available and has
been used to diagnose homozygous achondroplasia. Preimplantation
genetic testing can be used to identify double dominant pathogenic
variants.

Hypochondroplasia

Hypochondroplasia resembles achondroplasia but is milder. Usually, it
is not apparent until childhood, when mild short stature affecting the
limbs becomes evident. Children have a stocky build, disproportionately short extremities, and slight frontal bossing of the head. Learning disabilities may be more common in this condition. Radiographic
changes are mild and consistent with the mild achondroplastic phenotype. Complications are rare; in some patients, the condition is never
diagnosed. Adult heights range from 131-154.5 cm for men and 124138 cm for women. An FGFR3 pathogenic variant at codon 540 is the
most pathogenic variant found in patients with more severe hypochondroplasia. Genetic heterogeneity exists in hypochondroplasia; that is,
SHOX pathogenic variants are associated with a very similar clinical phenotype. Recombinant growth hormone therapy may enhance
growth and improve body disproportion but is still considered controversial with limited evidence of increased final adult height.

JANSEN METAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA

Jansen metaphyseal chondrodysplasia is a rare, dominantly inherited
chondrodysplasia characterized by severe shortening of limbs associated with an unusual facial appearance (see Chapter 735). Sometimes
it is accompanied by clubfoot and hypercalcemia with serum calcium
values of 13-15 mg/dL. At birth, a diagnosis can be made from these
clinical findings, and radiographs that show short tubular bones with
characteristic metaphyseal abnormalities that include flaring, irregular mineralization, fragmentation, and widening of the physeal space.
The epiphyses are normal. The joints become enlarged and limited in
mobility with age. Flexion contractures develop at the knees and hips,
producing a bent-­over posture. The spine can also be deformed by the

Chapter 738

Disorders Involving Ion
Transporters
Daniah Albokhari and Julie E. Hoover-­Fong
Five genes related to ion transporters have been reported to be involved
in skeletal dysplasia conditions, including the SLC39A13 gene causing
Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome, spondylodysplastic type, the SLCO2A1 gene
causing hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (OA), the SLC10A7 gene causing multiple joint dislocations with amelogenesis imperfecta, and the
SLC34A3 gene causing hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria
(HHRH). This chapter will focus on pathogenic variants in the sulfate
transporter gene (SLC26A2), also known as diastrophic dysplasia sulfate transporter (DTDST), which is the most common ion transporter
gene causing sulphation disorders skeletal dysplasia. It encompasses a
spectrum of both lethal and nonlethal chondrodysplasia, including, in
order of decreasing severity, achondrogenesis type 1B, atelosteogenesis type II, diastrophic dysplasia, and a rare recessive form of multiple
epiphyseal dysplasia (rMED). The gene product sulfate transporter is
important to uptake sulfate ions into cells and is important for cartilage cells that add sulfate moieties to newly synthesized proteoglycans destined for cartilage extracellular matrix. Matrix proteoglycans
are responsible for many of the properties of cartilage that allow it to
serve as a template for skeletal development. The clinical manifestations result from defective sulfation of cartilage proteoglycans (see also
Table 735.1).
A number of pathogenic alleles have been found for the DTDST
gene; they variably disturb transporter function. The disorders are
recessive traits requiring the presence of bi-­allelic pathogenic variants.
The phenotype is determined by the combination of abnormal alleles
with some alleles present in more than one disorder.

Achondrogenesis Type 1B and Atelosteogenesis
Type 2

Achondrogenesis type 1B and atelosteogenesis type 2 are rare recessive
lethal chondrodysplasias. The most serious is achondrogenesis type
1B, which demonstrates a severe lack of skeletal development usually
detected in utero or after a miscarriage. The limbs are extremely short,
the head is soft, the thorax is narrow, and the abdomen protuberant.
Skeletal radiographs show poor to missing ossification of skull bones,
vertebral bodies, fibulas, and ankle bones. The pelvis is hypoplastic, and
the ribs are short and slightly thin. The femurs are short and exhibit a
trapezoid shape with irregular metaphyses.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4348 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

Fig. 738.2 Radiograph of hands in diastrophic dysplasia. The meta-

carpals and phalanges are irregular and short. The first metacarpal is
ovoid.

Fig. 738.1 Child with diastrophic dysplasia. The extremities are dra-

matically shortened (top). Clubfoot is commonly observed (middle left).
The fingers are short, especially the index finger; the thumb characteristically is proximally placed and has a hitchhiker appearance (middle
right). The upper helix of the ears becomes swollen 3-4 wk postnatally
(lower left), and this inflammation spontaneously resolves, leaving a
cauliflower deformity of the pinnae (lower right).

Infants with atelosteogenesis type II are stillborn or die soon after
birth; prematurity is common. They exhibit very short limbs, especially
the proximal segments with normal size head and midface hypoplasia.
Clubfoot and dislocations of the elbows and knees may be detected.
Hypoplasia of vertebral bodies, especially in the cervical and lumbar
spine, and hypoplastic ilia with flat acetabulum are found on radiographs. The femora and humeri are hypoplastic and display a club-­
shaped appearance. The distal limb bones, including the ulna and
fibula, are poorly ossified.
Both disorders have a 25% recurrence risk and are potentially detectable in utero by pathogenic variant analysis if the mutant alleles are
identified in the parents. Prenatal diagnosis is possible with fetal imaging and/or pathogenic variant testing, which is commercially available.

Diastrophic Dysplasia

Diastrophic dysplasia is a well-­
characterized disorder recognized
at birth by the presence of very short extremities, normal head size,
clubfoot, and short hands, with proximal displacement of the thumb
producing a hitchhiker appearance (Fig. 738.1). The hands are usually
deviated in an ulnar direction. Bony fusion of the metacarpophalangeal joints (symphalangism) is common, as is restricted movement of
many joints, including the hips, knees, and elbows. The external ears
often become inflamed soon after birth. The inflammation resolves

spontaneously but leaves the ears fibrotic and contracted (cauliflower
ear deformity). Many newborns have a cleft palate.
Radiographs reveal short and broad tubular bones with flared
metaphyses and flat, irregular epiphyses (Fig. 738.2). The capital femoral epiphyses are hypoplastic, and the femoral heads are broad. The
ulnas and fibulas are disproportionately short. Carpal centers may be
developmentally advanced with the first metacarpal typically ovoid,
and the metatarsals twisted medially. There may be vertebral abnormalities, including clefts of cervical vertebral lamina and narrowing of
the interpedicular distances in the lumbar spine.
Complications are primarily orthopedic and tend to be severe
and progressive, leading to joint contractures, spine deformity and
early onset OA. The clubfoot deformity in the newborn resists usual
treatments, and multiple corrective surgeries are common. Scoliosis
typically develops during early childhood. It often requires multiple
surgical procedures to control, and it sometimes compromises respiratory function in older children. Despite the orthopedic problems,
patients typically have normal intelligence, have normal life span, and
reach adult heights in the 105-130 cm range, depending on the severity of scoliosis. Growth curves are available for diastrophic dysplasia.
Respiratory insufficiency may present in neonates because of the small
rib cage and tracheal instability and collapsibility. In these cases, supportive measures such as mechanical ventilation may be required.
Cervical kyphosis is seen in most newborns, which improves spontaneously in childhood. However, some may experience severe cervical
kyphosis leading to spinal cord compression.
Some patients are mildly affected and exhibit slight short stature
and joint contractures, no clubfoot or cleft palate, and correspondingly
mild radiographic changes. The mild phenotype tends to recur within
families. The recurrence risk of this autosomal recessive condition is
25%. Ultrasonographic examination can be employed for prenatal
diagnosis, but if DTDST pathogenic variants can be identified in the
patients or parents, molecular genetic diagnosis is possible.

AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE MULTIPLE EPIPHYSEAL
DYSPLASIA

Although previously regarded as a multiple epiphyseal dysplasia, according to the new nosology, rMED is now classified among other sulfation
disorders. rMED typically presents during adolescence with the gradual
onset of hip and knee pain that might resemble rheumatoid arthritis.
Later on, patients present with hand, feet, and knee deformities and scoliosis. Fifty percent of individuals present during infancy with club feet
and external ear abnormalities. Stature is normal during childhood, but
final height might be slightly decreased compared with unaffected siblings and ranges from 150-180 cm. Radiographic findings include flat
epiphysis, mild brachydactyly, and double-­layered patella. Diagnosis is
clinical, based on presentation and radiologic findings, but molecular
confirmation is available with a detection rate over 90%. Management
includes physical therapy, pain control, and orthopedic interventions.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 739 u Disorders Involving Transcription Factors 4349

Chapter 739

Disorders Involving
Transcription Factors
Julie E. Hoover-­Fong and Daniah Albokhari
Fig. 739.1 Campomelic dysplasia. Bell-­shaped thorax, hypoplastic
Transcription factors are proteins that control the transcription
of DNA into RNA to make proteins essential for cellular function.
Pathogenic variants in the genes that make transcription factors
can result in disease by “turning on” or “turning off ” downstream
genes to result in disease. Of the estimated 1,500 known transcription factors in humans, four are associated with well-­delineated
bone dysplasias. Campomelic dysplasia (CD), cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD), and SHOX gene-­related conditions are considered
dysplasias, whereas nail-­patella syndrome (NPS) is classified as a
dysostosis (meaning a skeletal disorder limited to individual bones
or group of bone rather than the entire skeleton, as in a skeletal
dysplasia) (see also Table 735.1).
Pathogenic variants in genes that encode transcription factors
that cause disease are SOX9, RUNX2 (CBFA1), SHOX, and LMX1B,
respectively. SOX9 is a member of the SOX family of transcription
factors related to the SRY (sex-­determining region of the Y chromosome) gene; RUNX2 (CBFA1) belongs to the runt family of transcription factor genes; SHOX is part of the homeobox gene family;
and LMX1B is part of the LIM homeodomain gene family. Each
results in a disorder caused by haploinsufficiency of the respective
gene products. CD, CCD, and NPS are all autosomal dominant conditions, whereas SHOX-­related conditions are inherited in a pseudoautosomal fashion.

scapula, bowed femurs, widely spaced ischial bones. (From Campeau
P, Schlesinger AE. Skeletal dysplasias [Fig. 12]. [Updated 2017 Jan 30].
In: De Groot LJ, Chrousos G, Dungan K, et al., eds. Endotext [internet].
South Dartmouth, MA, 2000, MDText.com, Inc. Fig 12. Available at
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK279130/.)

A

B

CAMPOMELIC DYSPLASIA

Campomelic dysplasia is apparent in newborn infants and characterized by short, bowed long bones (especially in the lower legs), respiratory distress, cervical spine anomalies, Pierre-­Robin sequence,
and variable involvement of the central nervous system, heart, and
kidneys. In some cases, femoral bowing is minimal (i.e., acampomelic campomelic dysplasia). Additionally, 75% of XY individuals
have some degree of gonadal dysgenesis that ranges from normal
female phenotype through ambiguous genitalia and lack of determination of testicular tissue with undervirilization. 46,XX individuals
have an expected female phenotype with normal ovarian differentiation. Therefore karyotype analysis is indicated in every female with
campomelia. These features are because of the role of SOX9 in the
differentiation of testicular tissue downstream of SRY. Compared
with SOX9 haploinsufficiency, duplications cause gonadal tissue to
differentiate into testicular tissue in 46,XX individuals, highlighting
the dosage sensitivity of SOX9 in gonadal differentiation. Radiographs confirm long bone bowing and often show hypoplasia of the
scapulae and pelvic bones (Fig. 739.1). Affected infants often die
of respiratory distress in the neonatal period because of tracheomalacia, small thoracic volume, and early scoliosis. Complications
in children and adolescents who survive include cervical instability, short stature with progressive kyphoscoliosis, recurrent apnea
and respiratory infections, hearing loss, and learning difficulties.
Because of a deficiency of gonadal differentiation, 46,XY individuals with female genitalia often present with absent thelarche and
primary amenorrhea. Pathogenic variant testing is commercially
available and has a >95% detection rate. Nearly all individuals with
CD represent a de novo pathogenic variant in SOX9.

C
Fig. 739.2 Features of cleidocranial dysplasia displayed. A, The fore-

head is bulky with a central depression, the eyes are widely spaced, and
the jaw is pointed. The clavicle is misshapen (arrow). B, Note patency
of the anterior fontanelle. C, Hyperdontia pantomogram of an affected
male showing supernumerary teeth. (From Roberts T, Stephen L, Beighton P. Cleidocranial dysplasia: a review of the dental, historical, and
practical implications with an overview of the South African experience.
Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol. 2013;115[1]:46–55. Figs.
1, 4, and 6.)

CLEIDOCRANIAL DYSPLASIA

Cleidocranial dysplasia can be recognized in infants because of
sloping shoulders, wide fontanelles, and prominent forehead. Birth
length is normal, but mild short stature and dental abnormalities
are evident during childhood (Fig. 739.2). The shoulders of patients

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4350 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

A

C

B

Fig. 739.3 Nail-­patella syndrome. A, Adolescent showing nail hypoplasia, especially of thumbs, and displacement of small patellae. B, Two af-

fected children showing nail dysplasia. C, Incomplete extension of the elbows. (From Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M, eds. Smith’s Recognizable
Patterns of Human Malformation, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2013. Fig. 1, p. 574.)

with CD can collapse to meet in the midline because of hypoplasia
or absence of the clavicles. Radiographs will reveal the abnormal
clavicles, delayed ossification of cranial bones with multiple ossification centers (Wormian bones), and delayed ossification of pelvic
bones. The anterior fontanelle is wide and may remain open into
adulthood. The course is relatively uncomplicated except for dislocations and variable diffuse joint pain (especially of the shoulders),
dental anomalies (e.g., supernumerary and/or retained primary
teeth) that require dental treatment, and risk of hearing loss because
of infections. Affected individuals are shorter than unaffected siblings and have an increased risk of genu valgum, pes planus, and
scoliosis. Diagnosis is based on clinical and radiographic presentation, but molecular confirmation is available with a detection rate
of >70%. The proportion of cases caused by de novo pathogenic
variants is high. Management includes prevention of ear infections,
speech therapy, dental, and orthopedic interventions as indicated.

including absence, hypoplasia, clefts, ridged, thin, or hypertropic
nails, all of which may worsen in severity moving in the ulnar to
radial direction. Elbow abnormalities include limitation of movement, cubits valgus, and pterygium. The patella can be hypoplastic
or absent (Fig. 739.3). Iliac horns project posterior-­laterally from
the center of the iliac bone. A total of 30% of patients have nephritis
that resembles chronic glomerulonephritis that presents with proteinuria with or without hematuria; 5% of cases progress to end-­
stage renal disease. There is an increased risk of glaucoma for NPS
patients. NPS is often inherited with 12% of cases being de novo.
Diagnosis is based on clinical presentation, and molecular confirmation is available with a 95% detection rate. Management includes
treatment of orthopedic complications, surveillance and treatment
of renal disease, and ophthalmologic follow-­up.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

SHOX GENE-­RELATED CONDITIONS

The SHOX gene is located on the pseudoautosomal region of the X
and Y chromosomes (i.e., Xp22.33/Yp11.32). Because of crossover
during meiotic replication, a SHOX variant can segregate on both
sex chromosomes, thereby allowing inheritance to occur from male
to male, male to female, female to female, and female to male (i.e.,
sex chromosome gene location while appearing to have autosomal
inheritance; pseudoautosomal). Haploinsufficiency of the SHOX
gene (i.e., loss of one copy of the gene) through deletion, single
nucleotide variant, or abnormal regulation of adjacent genes causes
Leri-­Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) and idiopathic short stature
(ISS) and contributes to Turner syndrome features when included
in the absent X-­chromosome material. Features of LWD include
short stature, mesomelia, and Madelung deformity of the wrists.
ISS does not have other phenotypic features of an abnormal SHOX
gene other than short stature. This distinguishes ISS from Turner
syndrome in which the entire X chromosome is typically missing
in affected females, causing short stature, pubertal delay/absence,
cardiac anomalies, nuchal folds, and other anomalies. Growth hormone injections can provide effective treatment for short stature
associated with a SHOX gene abnormality.

Chapter 740

Osteopetrosis and Other
Disorders Involving
Defective Bone
Resorption
Julie E. Hoover-­Fong and Daniah Albokhari

NAIL-­PATELLA SYNDROME

Dysplasia of the nails, absence or hypoplasia of the patella, abnormalities of the elbow, and spurs or “horns” extending from the
iliac bones characterize NPS, also called osteo-­onychodysostosis.
Penetrance is high, but clinical presentation is extremely variable
with a wide spectrum of severity. Some patients present in early
childhood, whereas others are asymptomatic as adults. Nail abnormalities are almost universal with a wide variety of manifestations,

Bone dysplasias displaying increased bone density are rare. Osteopetrosis, which has many subtypes, pycnodysostosis, and dysosteosclerosis
are the principal members of this disease category. The clinical features
and complications of these conditions are the result of abnormal osteoclast formation and function, resulting in defective bone resorption
(Table 740.1).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 740 u Osteopetrosis and Other Disorders Involving Defective Bone Resorption 4351
Table 740.1  	 Osteopetrosis and Related Osteoclast Disorders
GROUP / DISORDER

INHERITANCE

GENE OR LOCUS

Osteopetrosis, neonatal or infantile form

AR

TCIRG, CLCN, SNX10

Osteopetrosis, infantile form, with nervous system
involvement

AR

OSTM1

Osteopetrosis, infantile form, osteoclast-­poor with
immunoglobulin deficiency

AR

TNFRSF11A

Osteopetrosis, intermediate form

AR

TCIRG1, TNFSF11, PLEKHM1, CLCN7

Osteopetrosis, late-­onset, dominant form

AD

CLCN7

Osteopetrosis with renal tubular acidosis

AR

CA2

Osteopetrosis with ectodermal dysplasia and immune
defect (OLEDAID)

XL

IKBKG

Osteopetrosis, moderate form

AR

SLC4A2

Osteopetrosis, moderate form with defective leucocyte
adhesion

AR

FERMT3, RASGRP2

Osteosclerotic metaphyseal dysplasia

AR

LRRK1

Pyknodysostosis

AR

CTSK

Dysosteosclerosis

AR

SLC29A3, TNFRSF11A

Dysosteosclerosis with degenerative encephalopathy and
brain malformation

AR

CSF1R

Data from Unger S, Ferreira CR, Mortier GR, et al. Nosology of genetic skeletal disorders: 2023 revision. Am J Med Genet 2023;191A:1164-1209 (Table 1, Group 24, pp 1184-1185).

OSTEOPETROSIS

The term osteopetrosis derives from the Greek root “osteo,” meaning bone, and “petrosis,” meaning stone. Osteopetrosis is marked
by increased bone mass caused by abnormal osteoclast formation
or function. The dense bone in osteopetrosis invades the marrow
space, causing anemia and pancytopenia, and impinges on nerves
traversing cranial and other skeletal foramina, causing deafness,
blindness, and palsies. Although the skeleton is dense in osteopetrosis, the bone quality is poor and may be prone to fracture because
of imbalanced bone turnover.
To date, genes known to cause osteopetrosis include: CLCN7,
TCIRG1, OSTM1, SNX10, CA2, PLEKHM1, TNFRSF11A, TNFSF11,
IKBKG, SLC4A2, FERMT3, and RASGRP2. Pathogenic variants in
CLCN7, TCIRG1, OSTM1, SNX10, CA2, and PLEKHM1 prevent
normal osteoclast function to resorb bone while TNFRSF11A,
TNFSF11 encode proteins (RANK and RANKL, respectively) that
are essential to the formation of osteoclasts. Pathogenic variants
in CLCN7 may cause disease in an autosomal dominant or recessive fashion and variants in IKBKG are X-linked, whereas all others here cause recessive osteopetrosis. CLCN7-­related autosomal
dominant osteopetrosis occurs in 1 in 20,000 births, while collectively, the recessive form of osteopetrosis occurs in 1 in 250,000
births. Pathogenic variants in CLCN7 are the most common cause
of osteopetrosis overall, causing a wide spectrum of disease severity
ranging from late childhood/adolescent-­onset autosomal dominant
osteopetrosis II (ADOII) to more involved intermediate autosomal
osteopetrosis (IAO) to the most severe autosomal recessive osteopetrosis (ARO) with onset at birth. In general, the other recessive
forms of osteopetrosis are also severe, usually detected in infancy
because of macrocephaly, hepatosplenomegaly, deafness, blindness,
and severe anemia.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Most of the manifestations of osteopetrosis are because of failure to
remodel growing bones. This leads to narrowing of cranial nerve
foramina and encroachment on marrow spaces, which results in
secondary complications, such as optic and facial nerve dysfunction, and anemia accompanied by compensatory extramedullary
hematopoiesis in the liver and spleen (Table 740.2). The unusually
dense bones are weak, leading to increased risk of fractures.
In the severe recessive infancy-­onset form, patients present with
macrocephaly, hepatosplenomegaly, deafness, blindness, and severe
anemia. Radiographs reveal diffuse bone sclerosis and hypocalcemia may be present. Later radiographs show the characteristic
bone-­within-­bone appearance throughout the skeleton (Figs. 740.1
and 740.2). With time, infants typically fail to thrive and show psychomotor delay and worsening of cranial neuropathies and anemia.
Dental problems, osteomyelitis of the mandible, and pathologic
fractures are common. The most severely affected patients die during infancy; less severely affected patients rarely survive beyond the
second decade but often only after treatment with bone marrow
transplant. Those who survive beyond infancy usually have learning disabilities but might have normal intelligence despite hearing
and vision loss.
The autosomal dominant form of osteopetrosis (Albers-­Schönberg
disease, osteopetrosis tarda, or marble bone disease) usually manifests during childhood or adolescence with fractures and mild anemia
and, less often, as cranial nerve dysfunction, dental abnormalities, or
osteomyelitis of the mandible. Skeletal radiographs reveal a generalized increase in bone density and clubbing of metaphyses. Alternating
lucent and dense bands produce a sandwich appearance to vertebral
bodies. The radiographic changes are sometimes incidental findings in
otherwise asymptomatic adolescents and adults.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4352 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 740.2  	 Complications of Osteopetrosis by Subspeciality
SUBSPECIALTY

COMPLICATION

Endocrinology

Osteopetrorickets
Hypocalcemia

Ophthalmology

Papilledema
Ptosis
Strabismus
Paralysis of extraocular muscles
Optic nerve atrophy
Exophthalmos
Nystagmus
Retinal degeneration
Tearing (from nasolacrimal duct obstruction)

Dentistry

Delay/failure of tooth eruption
Malformed crowns/roots
Periodontal ligament defects
Odontoma
Tooth agenesis
Enamel hypoplasia
Tooth decay/caries
Thickened lamina dura
Osteomyelitis (most frequently of the mandible)

Orthopedics

Skeletal deformities
Scoliosis
Spondylolisthesis
Fractures (particularly of the long bones)
Delayed union/nonunion
Degenerative arthritis
Spondylolysis

Neurology/ neurosurgery

Compressive cranial neuropathies (often optic and facial nerves, but can involve any of cranial nerves I–VIII)
Increased intracranial pressure
Craniosynostosis
Arnold–Chiari I malformation
Neuromuscular scoliosis
Developmental delay/regression, seizures (OSTM1 mutation)
Calcifications of the basal ganglia, thalami (CAII deficiency)
Hydrocephalus
Cerebrovascular stenosis/occlusion
Acquired encephalocele

Otolaryngology

Conductive hearing loss
Recurrent otitis media
Chronic congestion (poorly pneumatized sinuses)
Rhinorrhea
Choanal atresia
Rhinosinusitis
Obstructive sleep apnea

Hematology

Thrombocytopenia with bleeding
Anemia
Leukopenia with frequent infections
Hepatosplenomegaly
Transfusion dependence

Nephrology

Renal tubular acidosis, nephrocalcinosis, and nephrolithiasis (CAII deficiency)

From Wu CC, Econs MJ, DiMeglio LA, et al. Diagnosis and management of osteopetrosis: consensus guidelines from the osteopetrosis working group. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
2017;102(9):3111-3123 (Table 2, p. 3116).

TREATMENT

Most of the bone manifestations in severe osteopetrosis caused by
intrinsic osteoclast defects can be prevented or reversed by hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT), if carried out before
development of irreversible secondary complications, such as visual
impairment. RANKL replacement therapy may be useful in patients

with RANKL deficiency caused by TNFSF11 bi-­allelic pathogenic
variants, who do not benefit from HSCT. Interferon-γ is used to
delay progression in patients with severe malignant infantile osteopetrosis. Symptomatic care, such as dental care, transfusions for
anemia, and antibiotic treatment of infections, is important for
patients who survive infancy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 740 u Osteopetrosis and Other Disorders Involving Defective Bone Resorption 4353

Fig. 740.1 Osteopetrosis. Thick dense bones, alternating bands of sclerosis, and normal density bone in long bones, rugger jersey spine, dense
base of skull. (From Campeau P, Schlesinger AE. Skeletal dysplasias. [Updated 2017, Jan 30]. In De Groot LJ, Chrousos G, Dungan K, et al, eds.
Endotext [internet]. South Dartmouth, MA, 2000, MDText.com, Inc. Fig. 14. Available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK279130/.)

management of dental problems and fractures. Although some
patients have a persistently open anterior fontanelle (i.e., even into
adulthood), others with pycnodysostosis have craniosynostosis.
The overall prognosis for these patients is generally good, and they
typically reach 130-150 cm in height. Skeletal radiographs show a
generalized increase in bone density. In contrast to many disorders
in this group, the metaphyses are normal. Other changes include
wide sutures and Wormian bones in the skull, a small mandible,
and osteolysis of the distal phalanges. Homozygous or compound
heterozygous missense, nonsense, insertions, deletions, and splicing variants have been described in the gene CTSK, which encodes
cathepsin K. This is a lysosomal protease that is involved in bone
resorption and remodeling. CTSK is highly expressed in osteoclasts,
and pathogenic variants prevent degradation of bone matrix proteins (e.g., type I and II collagen), which is necessary for normal
bone remodeling and resorption. Growth hormone therapy has
been used to improve growth.
Fig. 740.2 Osteopetrosis. Right-­
hand radiograph obtained at 2

weeks of age. Note metaphyseal lucent bands in the distal ulna and
radius (arrows) and short tubular bones. (From Stark Z, Savarirayan R.
Osteopetrosis. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2009;4:5.)

PYCNODYSOSTOSIS AND DYSOSTEOSCLEROSIS
Pycnodysostosis

An autosomal recessive bone dysplasia related to osteopetrosis,
pycnodysostosis manifests in early childhood with short limbs,
characteristic facies, an open anterior fontanel, a large skull with
frontal and occipital bossing, acroosteolysis, and dental abnormalities. The hands and feet are short and broad, and the nails may be
dysplastic. The sclerae may be blue. Minimal trauma often leads
to fractures. Treatment is symptomatic and focused mainly on the

Dysosteosclerosis

Dysosteosclerosis is another rare bone disease with generalized
increased bone density plus widening of tubular bones and vertebral
flattening. It is caused by pathogenic variants in three genes: SLC9A3,
CSF1R, and TNFRSF11A (which is allelic with osteopetrosis). Affected
individuals have short stature and cranial nerve involvement caused
by impingement of the foramina by the abnormally dense bone. No
disease-­specific treatment has been developed.
There are several other conditions marked by hyperostotic and fragile bones but also other anomalies or conditions distinguishing them
from osteopetrosis, pycnodysostosis, and dysosteosclerosis (Table
740.3).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4354 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 740.3  Other Conditions with Hyperostotic Fragile Bones
GENE

DISORDER

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS

FEATURES DISTINGUISHING THIS
DISORDER FROM CLCN7-­RELATED ARO

CA2

ARO w/renal tubular acidosis (RTA)
(OMIM 259730)

Generalized osteosclerosis. Cerebral
calcifications are typical and may be
associated with ID.

Onset of ARO with RTA is usually later
than in infantile malignant form of ARO
and disease course is milder.

OSTM1

OSTM1-­related ARO
(OMIM 259720)

∼4% of ARO is caused by pathogenic
variants in OSTM1. Extremely severe form
of ARO with CNS involvement that is
indistinguishable from most severe forms
of CLCN7-­related ARO.

OSTM1-­related ARO is frequently
associated with structural brain
anomalies.

PLEKHM1

PLEKHM1-­related ARO
(OMIM 611497)

Very rare, can look like ADOII.

PLEKHM1-­related ARO appears to be
very mild and can regress with ↑ age.
One person with PLEKHM1-­related ARO
caused by a heterozygous pathogenic
variant has been described.

SNX10

SNX10-­related ARO
(OMIM 615085)

∼4% of ARO is caused by pathogenic variants SNX10-­related ARO appears to be slightly
in SNX10; in particular, “Västerbottenian
less severe than CLCN7-­related ARO.
osteopetrosis” is caused by SNX10
pathogenic variants. Loss of vision, anemia,
and bone fragility are frequently observed,
warranting use of HSCT.

TCIRG1

TCIRG1-­related ARO
(OMIM 259700)

>50% of ARO is caused by pathogenic
variants in TCIRG1.

Higher frequency of neurodevelopmental
delay and seizures in CLCN7-­related
ARO than in TCIRG1-­related ARO.
Noncoding TCIRG1 variants can cause
milder phenotype that resembles ADOII.

TNFRSF11A

Osteoclast-­poor ARO
(OMIM 612301)

TNFSF11

Osteoclast-­poor ARO
(OMIM 259710)

Characterized by onset within first year of
life and typical ARO manifestations.
Investigation of bone biopsy is prerequisite
for reliable diagnosis.

TNFSF11 pathogenic variants cause a
slight T-­cell defect, and TNFRSF11A
pathogenic variants can lead to
hypogammaglobulinemia similar to a
common variable immune deficiency.
It is crucial to rule out TNFSF11-­ and
TNFRSF11A-­related ARO, as HSCT is not
successful in these persons.

ADOII, Autosomal dominant osteopetrosis type II; ARO, autosomal recessive osteopetrosis; CNS, central nervous system; ID, intellectual disability; HSCT, hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation
From Sobacchi C, Villa A, Schulz A, Kornak U. CLCN7-­Related Osteopetrosis. 2007 Feb 12 [updated 2022 Jan 20]. In: Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Pagon RA, et al., eds. GeneReviews
[Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993–2022.

Chapter 741

Other Inherited Disorders
of Skeletal Development
Julie E. Hoover-­Fong and Daniah Albokhari
Advances in understanding have led to the delineation of the genetic
basis of disorders that were previously poorly understood. Some of
these conditions are now classified into gene families based on their
molecular and clinical findings, as outlined in the most recent nosology and classification of genetic skeletal disorders and previous chapters. Additional important skeletal dysplasias that do not fit into one of
the previous categories are discussed in this chapter.

ELLIS-­VAN CREVELD SYNDROME

The Ellis-­van Creveld syndrome, also known as chondroectodermal
dysplasia, is a skeletal and an ectodermal dysplasia. This skeletal dysplasia presents at birth with short limbs, especially the middle and

distal segments, accompanied by postaxial polydactyly of the hands
and sometimes of the feet (Fig. 741.1). Nail dysplasia and dental anomalies (including neonatal, absent, premature loss of teeth, and upper
lip defects) constitute the ectodermal dysplasia. Additional common
manifestations include atrial septal defects and other congenital heart
defects.
Skeletal radiographs reveal short tubular bones with clubbed ends,
especially the proximal tibia and ulna (Fig. 741.2). Carpal bones display extra ossification centers and fusion; cone-­shaped epiphyses are
evident in the hands. A bony spur is often noted above the medial
aspect of the acetabulum.
Ellis-­van Creveld syndrome is an autosomal recessive condition
that occurs with increased frequency in the Amish and Finnish
founder populations than in the general population. Pathogenic
variants have been identified in one of two genes, EVC (EVC1) or
EVC2 (LIMBIN), which map in a head-­to-­head configuration to
chromosome 4p. Disease-­causing variants of EVC2 are detected in
the allelic condition Weyers acrofacial dysostosis. EVC and EVC2
proteins are thought to influence hedgehog signaling in cilia by constitutively associating in a ringlike pattern in the ciliary transition
zone and transducing extracellular signals to the nucleus via hedgehog signaling. Fgf18 may also play a significant role. This disorder
is classified under the ciliopathies with major skeletal involvement
(see Chapter 101.3).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 741 u Other Inherited Disorders of Skeletal Development

A

B

Fig. 741.1 A, Ellis-­van Creveld syndrome in a young female. Note

short stature, joint contractures at the elbows, and marked genu valgum. B, Multiple digits (polydactyly) in a different patient with Ellis-­van
Creveld syndrome. (A from Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow R, Braunwald E,
eds. Braunwald’s Heart Disease: a textbook of cardiovascular medicine,
7th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2004. Fig 70.6; B from Beerman
LB, Kreutzer J, Allada V. Cardiology. In: Zitelli BJ, McIntire SC, Nowalk
AJ, eds. Zitelli and Davis’ Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2012. Fig 5.6.)

Asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy, or Jeune syndrome, is an autosomal recessive chondrodysplasia. Newborn infants present with a long,
narrow thorax and respiratory insufficiency associated with pulmonary hypoplasia. Neonates often die. Other neonatal manifestations
include slightly short limbs and postaxial polydactyly. This condition
results from a disturbance of primary cilia, most often from pathogenic variants of the gene encoding cytoplasmic dynein 2 heavy chain
1 (DYNC2H1). This disorder is classified under ciliopathies with major
skeletal involvement (see Chapter 101.3).
Skeletal radiographs show very short ribs with anterior expansion.
Tubular limb bones are short with bulbous ends; cone-­shaped epiphyses occur in hand bones. The iliac bones are short and square with a
spur above the medial aspect of the acetabulum (Fig. 741.3).
If infants survive the neonatal period, respiratory function usually improves as the rib cage grows. Surgery that produces lateral
thoracic expansion improves rib growth and enhances chest wall
dimensions. Progressive renal dysfunction often develops during
childhood. Intestinal malabsorption and hepatic dysfunction have
also been reported.

SHORT-­RIB POLYDACTYLY SYNDROMES

These conditions, which share the clinical features of constricted
thoracic cage, short ribs, polydactyly, very short extremities, lethality during the newborn period and autosomal recessive inheritance.
Pathogenic variants that map to cilia-­
related genes—DYNC2H1,
IFT80, IFT81, WDR34, WDR60, DYNC2LI1, NEK1, IFT122, WDR19,
INTU, TRAF3IP1—are found in this group of disorders.

CARTILAGE-­HAIR HYPOPLASIA-­ANAUXETIC
SPECTRUM DISORDERS

Fig. 741.2 Radiograph of lower extremities in Ellis-­van Creveld syn-

drome. Tubular bones are short, and proximal fibula is short. Ossification is retarded in lateral tibia epiphyses, causing a knock-­knee
deformity.

Approximately 30% of patients die of cardiac or respiratory problems during infancy. Life span is otherwise normal; adult heights range
from 119-161 cm.

ASPHYXIATING THORACIC DYSTROPHY
See also Chapter 467.3.

4355

Cartilage-­hair hypoplasia (CHH), also known as metaphyseal chondrodysplasia–McKusick type, is part of a spectrum of disorders with
metaphyseal involvement that includes metaphyseal dysplasia without
hypotrichosis and anauxetic dysplasia. All disorders are characterized
by severe disproportionate short stature, which is usually recognized
at birth; the short limbs can lead to prenatal detection. They all show
autosomal recessive inheritance and are caused by pathogenic variants
in RMRP, a gene coding for a large untranslated RNA component of an
enzyme complex involved in processing mitochondrial RNA. Loss of
this gene product interferes with processing of both messenger RNA
and ribosomal RNA and correlates with the extent of bone dysplasia,
whereas loss of messenger RNA processing correlates with the degree
of hair hypoplasia, immunodeficiency, and hematologic abnormality.
Molecular testing confirms the diagnosis, and prenatal diagnosis is
available if the pathogenic variant is identified either in the patient or
the parents.
CHH is recognized during the second year because of growth deficiency affecting the limbs, accompanied by flaring of the lower rib cage,
a prominent sternum, and bowing of the legs. The hands and feet are
short, and the fingers are very short with extreme ligamentous laxity.
The hair is thin, sparse, and light colored; the nails are hypoplastic; and
the skin can be hypopigmented.
Radiographs show short tubular bones with flared, irregularly mineralized, and cupped metaphyses (Fig. 741.4). The knees are more
affected than are the hips, and the fibula is disproportionately longer
than the tibia. The metacarpals and phalanges are short and broad. Spinal radiographs reveal mild platyspondyly.
Nonskeletal manifestations associated with CHH include immunodeficiency (T-­cell abnormalities, neutropenia, leukopenia, and susceptibility to varicella zoster virus infections; children also may have
complications from smallpox and polio vaccinations), malabsorption,
celiac disease, and Hirschsprung disease. Adults are at risk for malignancy, especially non-­Hodgkin lymphoma and skin tumors. Adult
height ranges from 107-157 cm.
The highest birth prevalence is in the Amish and Finnish populations because of a founder effect. Carrier frequency in the Amish
is 1:19 with 1 per 1,300 births affected compared to a carrier frequency of 1:76 and 1 per 23,000 births affected in Finland. The
exact prevalence in the general population is not known, but CHH

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4356 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
is relatively rare. However, two allelic conditions, metaphyseal dysplasia without hypotrichosis and anauxetic dysplasia, expand the
phenotypic spectrum. Children with a growth disorder and abnormal hair should be evaluated for RMRP pathogenic variants.

TRPV4-­SPECTRUM DISORDERS

Pathogenic variants in TRPV4 cause a spectrum of conditions
including metatropic dysplasia, spondylometaphyseal dysplasia
(SMD), Kozlowski type, brachyolmia, and familial digital arthropathy with brachydactyly. Metatropic dysplasia and SMD, Kozlowski
type are expanded on next. Brachyolmia is dominated by progressive scoliosis and platyspondyly on x-­rays and familial digital
arthropathy with brachydactyly, which is characterized by deforming painful osteoarthritis of the interphalangeal, metacarpophalangeal, and metatarsophalangeal joints starting after the first decade
of life. The rest of the skeleton is unaffected in this condition. It
should also be noted that pathogenic variants in TRPV4 are also
responsible for a large group of neuromuscular disorders including Charcot-­Marie-­Tooth disease type 2C, scapuloperoneal spinal
muscular atrophy, and congenital distal spinal muscular atrophy.
Though there is considerable overlap of the phenotypes of the conditions within the skeletal group and the neuromuscular group,
there are only rare instances currently recognized of individual
patients with both features.

progressive musculoskeletal deformities. Adult heights range from
110-120 cm.
Skeletal radiographs show characteristic changes dominated by
severe platyspondyly and short tubular bones with expanded and
deformed metaphyses that exhibit a dumbbell appearance (Fig. 741.5).
The pelvic bones are hypoplastic and exhibit a halberd appearance
because of a small sacrosciatic notch and a notch above the lateral margin of the acetabulum.

METATROPIC DYSPLASIA

Metatropic dysplasia is an autosomal dominant disorder resulting from heterozygous pathogenic variants of transient receptor
potential vanilloid family 4 (TRPV4), which encodes a calcium-­
permeable cation channel. Newborn infants present with a long
narrow trunk and short extremities. A tail-­like appendage sometimes extends from the base of the spine. Odontoid hypoplasia is
common and may be associated with cervical instability. Kyphoscoliosis appears in late infancy and progresses through childhood,
often becoming severe enough to compromise cardiopulmonary
function. The joints are large and become progressively restricted
in mobility, except in the hands. Contractures often develop in
the hips and knees during childhood. Although severely affected
infants can die at a young age from respiratory failure, patients usually survive, although they can become disabled as adults from the

Fig. 741.4 Radiograph of lower extremities in cartilage-­hair hypoplasia. The tubular bones are short, and the metaphyses are flared and
irregular. The fibula is disproportionately long compared with the tibia.
The femoral necks are short.

Fig. 741.3 Asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy. Short ribs, long and narrow chest, small pelvis, trident acetabula, no platyspondyly (helps differentiate
from thanatophoric dysplasia), cystic renal disease. (From Campeau P, Schlesinger AE. Skeletal dysplasias. [Updated 2017 Jan 30]. In: De Groot LJ,
Chrousos G, Dungan K, et al., eds. Endotext [internet]. South Dartmouth, MA, 2000, MDText.com, Inc., Fig 6. Available at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.n
ih.gov/books/NBK279130/)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 741 u Other Inherited Disorders of Skeletal Development
SPONDYLOMETAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA,
KOZLOWSKI TYPE

Kozlowski type of spondylometaphyseal dysplasia is an autosomal
dominant allelic disorder to metatropic dysplasia caused by TRPV4
variants.
Kozlowski type of spondylometaphyseal dysplasia manifests in early
childhood with mild short stature involving mostly the trunk and a
waddling gait. The hands and feet may be short and stubby. Radiographs show flattening of vertebral bodies. The metaphyses of tubular
bones are widened and irregularly mineralized, especially at the proximal femur. The pelvic bones manifest mild hypoplasia. Scoliosis can
develop during adolescence. The disorder is otherwise uncomplicated,
and manifestations are limited to the skeleton. Adults reach heights of
130-150 cm.

DISORDERS INVOLVING FILAMINS

Pathogenic variants of genes encoding filamin A and filamin B proteins
have been detected in diverse disorders of skeletal development: filamin A pathogenic variants in otopalatodigital syndromes type 1 and 2,
frontometaphyseal dysplasia, Melnick-­Needles syndrome and terminal
osseous dysplasia with pigmentary defects and filamin B pathogenic
variants in Larsen syndrome and perinatal lethal atelosteogenesis types

A

B

Fig. 741.5 A, Radiograph of the lateral thoracolumbar spine in metatropic dysplasia showing severe platyspondyly. B, Radiograph of lower
extremities in metatropic dysplasia showing short tubular bones with
widened metaphyses. The femurs have a dumbbell appearance.

4357

1 and 3, spondylo-­carpal-­tarsal dysplasia and Boomerang dysplasia.
Filamins functionally connect extracellular to intracellular structural
proteins, thereby linking cells to their local microenvironment, which
is essential for skeletal development and growth.

JUVENILE OSTEOCHONDROSES

The juvenile osteochondroses are a heterogeneous group of disorders in which regional disturbances in bone growth cause noninflammatory arthropathies. Table 741.1 summarizes the juvenile
osteochondroses. Some have localized pain and tenderness (Freiberg disease, Osgood-­S chlatter disease [see Chapter 718.4], osteochondritis dissecans [see Chapter 718.3]), whereas others present
with painless limitation of joint movement (Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes
disease [see Chapter 719.3], Scheuermann disease [see Chapter
720.4]). Bone growth may be disrupted, leading to deformities. The
diagnosis is usually confirmed radiographically, and treatment is
symptomatic. The pathogenesis of these disorders is believed to
involve ischemic necrosis of primary and secondary ossification
centers. Although familial forms have been reported, these disorders usually occur sporadically.

CAFFEY DISEASE (INFANTILE CORTICAL
HYPEROSTOSIS)

This is a rare disorder of unknown etiology characterized by cortical hyperostosis with inflammation of the contiguous fascia and
muscle. It is often sporadic, but both autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive forms have been reported. Pathogenic variants in
FAM111A and TBCE have been identified in the autosomal dominant
and recessive forms, respectively. Sanjad-Sakati syndrome (hypoparathyroidism, intellectual disability, dysmorphism) is also caused
by pathogenic variants in TBCE. Caffey dysplasia is classified in the
slender bone dysplasia group.
Prenatal and more often postnatal onsets have been described.
Prenatal onset may be mild (autosomal dominant) or severe (autosomal recessive). Severe prenatal disease is characterized by typical
bone lesions, polyhydramnios, hydrops fetalis, severe respiratory
distress, prematurity, and high mortality. Onset in infancy (younger
than 6 months; average: 10 weeks) is most common; manifestations
include the sudden onset of irritability, swelling of contiguous soft
tissue that precedes the cortical thickening of the underlying bones,
fever, and anorexia. The swelling is painful with a woodlike induration but with minimal warmth or redness; suppuration is absent.
There are unpredictable remissions and relapses; an episode can last
2 weeks to 3 months. The most common bones involved include the
mandible (75%) (Fig. 741.6), the clavicle, and the ulna. If swelling is
not prominent or visible, the diagnosis might not be evident.
Laboratory features include elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate and serum alkaline phosphatase as well as, in some
patients, increased serum prostaglandin E levels. There may be

Table 741.1  Juvenile Osteochondroses
EPONYM

AFFECTED REGION

AGE AT PRESENTATION

Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease

Capital femoral epiphysis

3-12 yr

Osgood-­Schlatter disease

Tibial tubercle

10-16 yr

Sever disease

Os calcaneus

6-10 yr

Freiberg disease

Head of second metatarsal

10-14 yr

Scheuermann disease

Vertebral bodies

Adolescence

Blount disease

Medial aspect of proximal tibial epiphysis

Infancy or adolescence

Osteochondritis dissecans

Subchondral regions of knee, hip, elbow, and ankle

Adolescence

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4358 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
thrombocytosis and anemia. The radiographic features include
soft tissue swelling and calcification and cortical hyperostosis (Fig.
741.7). All bones may be affected except the phalanges or vertebral
bodies. The differential diagnosis includes other causes of hyperostosis such as chronic vitamin A intoxication, prolonged prostaglandin E infusion in children with ductal dependent congenital heart
disease, primary bone tumors, and scurvy.
Complications are unusual but include pseudoparalysis with limb
or scapula involvement, pleural effusions (rib), torticollis (clavicle),
mandibular asymmetry, bone fusion (ribs or ulna and radius), and
bone angulation deformities (common with severe prenatal onset).
Treatment includes indomethacin and prednisone (if there is a poor
response to indomethacin).

FIBRODYSPLASIA OSSIFICANS PROGRESSIVA

Fig. 741.6 Facies in infantile cortical hyperostosis. In almost all cases,

the changes have appeared before the fifth month of life. Unilateral
swelling of the left cheek and left side of the jaw in an infant 12 weeks
of age. (From Slovis T, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 11th
ed. Philadelphia: Mosby, 2008.)

A

B

Fig. 741.7 A, Radiograph of a 5-­mo-­old infant showing hyperostosis

of the mandible. B, Radiograph of a 5-­mo-­old infant showing hyperostosis of both legs. (From Kamoun-­Goldrat A, le Merrer M. Infantile
cortical hyperostosis [Caffey disease]: a review. J Oral Maxillofac Surg.
2008;66:2145–2150. Figs. 1 and 2.)

Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP) is a rare and severely
disabling disorder characterized by progressive extraskeletal heterotopic bone formation in soft connective tissues including muscles,
tendons, ligaments, fascia, and aponeuroses. With the exception of
deformity of the large toes, infants are normal at birth. Episodes of
painful soft tissue swelling with inflammation usually begin in early
childhood initially involving the upper back and neck, and later the
entire trunk and extremities. Repeated episodes (flare-­ups) slowly
transform the soft tissues into bands or plates of bone that span
joints and progressively limit movement and mobility. Episodes
are often triggered by injury, intramuscular injections, and viral
infection. Most patients are wheelchair bound by their late teens.
The average life span is approximately 40 years, with death usually
resulting from complications of thoracic insufficiency.
FOP results from heterozygous activating pathogenic variants of
the gene (ACVR1) encoding the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)
type I receptor, activin A receptor type I (ALK2). Patients with classic FOP have the same missense ACVR1 pathogenic variant, which
enhances BMP signaling, which, in turn, induces inflammation and
aberrant endochondral ossification through mechanisms that are
poorly understood. Environmental factors, such as injury, play an
important role in triggering these events. ACVR1 pathogenic variants usually occur sporadically, but autosomal dominant transmission has rarely been observed. FOP is classified in the disorganized
development of skeletal components group.
There is currently no definitive treatment for FOP. Supportive
care includes avoidance of injury-­prone physical activities, intramuscular injections including immunizations, and overstretching
of the jaw during dental procedures. Corticosteroids and other anti­
inflammatory agents reduce inflammation and pain during flare-­
ups but are unable to prevent heterotopic bone formation. Studies
in FOP animal models suggest that BMP type I kinase inhibitors and
retinoic acid receptor γ agonists, which block chondrogenesis—the
initial step in endochondral ossification—may be useful therapies
in the future. An animal FOP study has indicated that mutant ALK2
responds to activin A, induces canonical BMP signaling, and leads
to heterotopic bone formation, providing an additional possible
therapeutic target. The retinoic acid receptor γ agonist palovarotene
was approved by the US Food and Drug Administration in 2023 for
treatment of FOP for females ages 8 years and older and for males
ages 10 years and older.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 742 u Osteogenesis Imperfecta 4359

Chapter 742

PATHOGENESIS

Structural or quantitative defects in type I collagen cause the full clinical spectrum of OI (types I-­IV). Defects in processing either the N-­or
C-­terminal propeptides of type I collagen cause distinctive bone fragility syndromes. Type I collagen is the primary component of the extracellular matrix of bone and skin. Between 15% and 20% of patients
clinically indistinguishable from OI do not have a molecular defect
in type I collagen. These cases are typically caused by defects in genes
whose protein products interact with type I collagen. One group of
patients has overmodified collagen, with similar biochemical findings
to those with collagen structural defects and severe or lethal OI bone
dysplasia. These cases are caused by recessive null pathogenic variants
in any of the three components of the collagen prolyl 3-­hydroxylation
complex, prolyl 3-­hydroxylase 1 (encoded by LEPRE1) or its associated
protein, CRTAP, or cyclophilin B (CyPB, encoded by PPIB). A second
set of cases without collagen defects have biochemically normal collagen. Defects in IFITM5 and SERPINF1 account for defects in mineralization in types V and VI OI, while pathogenic variants in SERPINH1,
encoding the collagen chaperone HSP47, and FKBP10, encoding the
peptidyl-­prolyl cis-­trans isomerase FKBP65, cause types X and XI
OI, respectively. Rare pathogenic variants in BMP1, the enzyme that
processes the C-­propeptide of type I collagen, also cause a recessive
form of OI (type XIII). The newest set of genes added to the recessive OI causative panel (SP7, type XII OI; TMEM38B, type XIV OI;
WNT1, type XV OI; CREB3L1, type XVI OI, SPARC, type XVII OI,
and MBTPS2, type XVIII OI) are not only involved in osteoblast differentiation but also affect collagen synthesis and cross linking. There
are currently very few individuals with OI whose genetic defect is not
in a known causative gene.

Type I collagen is a heterotrimer composed of two α1(I) chains and one
α2(I) chain. The chains are synthesized as procollagen molecules with
short globular propeptide extensions on both ends of the central helical domain. The helical domain is composed of uninterrupted repeats
of the sequence Gly-­X-­Y, where Gly is glycine, X is often proline, and
Y is often hydroxyproline. The presence of glycine at every third residue is crucial to helix formation because its small side chain can be
accommodated in the interior of the helix. The chains are assembled
into trimers at their carboxyl ends, and helix formation then proceeds
linearly in a carboxyl to amino direction. Concomitant with helix
assembly and formation, helical proline and lysine residues are hydroxylated by prolyl 4-­hydroxylase and lysyl hydroxylase 1, and some of the
hydroxylysine residues are subsequently glycosylated. After secretion,
the propeptides are cleaved in the pericellular space by specific N-­and
C-­terminal propeptidases.
Collagen structural defects are predominantly of two types: 80% are
pathogenic missense variants causing substitutions of helical glycine
residues or crucial residues in the C-­propeptide by other amino acids,
and 20% are single exon splicing defects. The clinically mild OI type I
has a quantitative defect, with null pathogenic variants in one α1(I) allele
leading to a reduced amount of normal collagen. Deficiency of type I
procollagen caused by a C-­propeptide removal causes a paradoxical high
bone mass form of OI with mild or severe skeletal fragility depending
on whether the defect is in the cleavage site or the cleaving peptidase.
Impaired removal of the N-­propeptide causes an overlap syndrome of
Ehlers-­Danlos and OI (OI/EDS) with variable skeletal fragility.
Glycine substitutions in the two α chains have distinct genotype-­
phenotype relationships, but there is also striking phenotype variability
caused by independent pathogenic variants at the same site. In general,
glycine substitutions in the α1 chain are more lethal than those in the
α2(I) chain. Two lethal regions in α1(I) align with major ligand binding
regions of the collagen helix.
Classical OI (Sillence types I-­IV) is an autosomal dominant disorder,
as is type V OI. Some familial recurrences of OI are caused by parental
mosaicism for dominant collagen pathogenic variants. Recessive OI
accounts for 10–15% of newly diagnosed OI in North America. Three
recessive types are caused by null pathogenic variants in the genes coding for the components of the collagen prolyl 3-­hydroxylation complex in the endoplasmic reticulum (LEPRE1, CRTAP, or PPIB). Murine
models indicate that it is the absence of the complex components,
rather than the absence of the Pro986 modification, that is critical for
development of OI. Other recessive types are caused by null pathogenic variants in genes whose products are involved in collagen folding (SERPINH1, FKBP10), bone mineralization (SERPINF1), or defects
in osteoblast differentiation and function (SP7, TMEM38B, WNT1,
CREB3L1, SPARC, MBTPS2).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Osteogenesis Imperfecta
Joan C. Marini
Osteoporosis is fragility of the skeletal system and a susceptibility to
fractures of the long bones or vertebral compressions from mild or
inconsequential trauma (see Chapter 749). Osteogenesis imperfecta
(OI) (brittle bone disease), the most common genetic cause of osteoporosis, is a generalized disorder of connective tissue. The spectrum of OI
is extremely broad, ranging from forms that are lethal in the perinatal
period to a mild form in which the diagnosis may be equivocal in an
adult (Table 742.1).

ETIOLOGY

The autosomal dominant forms of OI occur equally in all racial and
ethnic groups, whereas recessive forms occur predominantly in ethnic groups with consanguineous marriages or as a founder effect in an
isolated population. The West African founder pathogenic variant for
type VIII OI has a carrier frequency of 1 in 200-300 among Black individuals. The collective incidence of all types of OI detectable in infancy
is approximately 1 in 20,000. There is a similar incidence of the mild
form OI type I.

PATHOLOGY

The pathogenic structural collagen variants in OI cause the bones to
be globally abnormal. The bone matrix contains abnormal type I collagen fibrils and relatively increased levels of types III and V collagen.
Several noncollagenous proteins of bone matrix are also reduced. Bone
cells also contribute to OI pathology, with abnormal osteoblast differentiation and increased numbers of active bone resorbing osteoclasts.
The hydroxyapatite crystals deposited on this matrix are poorly aligned
with the long axis of fibrils, and there is paradoxical hypermineralization of bone.

Classical OI was described with the triad of fragile bones, blue sclerae,
and early deafness, although most cases do not have all three features.
The Sillence classification divides OI into four types based on clinical
and radiographic criteria. Types V and VI were later proposed based
on histologic distinctions. Subsequent types VII-­XVIII were based on
identification of the molecular defect, followed by clinical description.

Osteogenesis Imperfecta Type I (Mild)

OI type I is sufficiently mild that it is often found in large pedigrees.
Many type I families have blue sclerae, recurrent fractures in childhood, and presenile (i.e., beginning in early adulthood) hearing loss
(30–60%). Both types I and IV are divided into A and B subtypes,
depending on the absence (A) or presence (B) of dentinogenesis
imperfecta, a type of dentin dysplasia resulting in discolored (often
blue-­gray or amber), translucent teeth that wear down rapidly or break.
Other possible connective tissue abnormalities include hyperextensible
joints, easy bruising, thin skin, joint laxity, scoliosis, wormian bones,
hernia, and mild short stature compared with family members. Fractures result from mild to moderate trauma but decrease after puberty.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4360 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 742.1  Osteogenesis Imperfecta
DISORDER

INHERITANCE

GENE

PREVIOUS NAMES / NOTATION

Osteogenesis imperfecta, non-deforming
(Sillence type 1)

AD

COL1A1, COL1A2

OMIM as OI type I

Osteogenesis imperfecta, severe perinatal form
(Sillence type 2)

AD

COL1A1, COL1A2

OMIM as OI type II

AR

CRTAP

OMIM as OI type VII

AR

P3H1

OMIM as OI type VIII

AR

PPIB

OMIM as OI type IX

AD

COL1A1, COL1A2, IFITM5

OMIM as OI type III

AD

SERPINF1

In OMIM as OI type VI

AR

CRTAP, P3H1

OMIM as OI type VII

AR

PPIB

OMIM as OI type IX

AR

SERPINH1

OMIM OI as type X

AR

FKBP10

OMIM as OI type XI

AR

TMEM38B

OMIM as OI type XIV

AR

BMP1

OMIM as OI type XIII

AR

WNT1

OMIM as OI type XV
Variants may result in AD
osteoporosis.

AR

CREB3L1

OMIM as OI type XVI
Ehlers-Danlos-like

AR

SPARC

OMIM as OI type XVII

AR

TENT5A

OMIM as OI type XVIII

XLR

MBTPS2

OMIM as OI type XIX

AR

MESD

OMIM as OI type XX

AR

KDELR2

OMIM as OI type XXL

AR

CCD134

OMIM as OI type XXII

AD

COL1A1, COL1A2, IFITM5

OMIM as OI type IV

AR

WNT1

OMIM as OI type XV

AR

CRTAP

OMIM as OI type VII

AD

PP1B

OMIM as OI type IX

AR

FKBP10

OMIM as OI type XI

AR

SP7

OMIM as OI type XII

Osteogenesis imperfecta with calcification of
interosseous membranes and/or hypertrophic callus
(OI type 5)

AD

IFITM5

May mimic progressively deforming
or moderate OI (Sillence types 3
and 4)

Osteogenesis imperfecta with craniosynostosis
(Cole- Carpenter syndrome)

AD

P4HB

Craniosynostosis is not well
documented.

AR

SEC24D

Most patients do not have
craniosynostosis but rather large
fontanels.

Osteoporosis – X-linked form

XL

MBTPS2

OMIM as OI type XIX

Osteoporosis – dominant form

AD

WNT1

OMIM as OI type XV

Osteogenesis imperfecta, progressively deforming
(Sillence type 3)

Osteogenesis imperfecta, moderate form
(Sillence type 4)

Data from Unger S, Ferreira CR, Mortier GR, et al: Nosology of genetic skeletal disorders: 2023 revision. Am J Med Genet 2023;191A:1164-1209 (Table 1, Group 26, pp. 1187-1190).

Osteogenesis Imperfecta Type II (Perinatal Lethal)

Infants with OI type II may be stillborn or die in the first years of life.
Birthweight and length are small for gestational age. There is extreme
fragility of the skeleton and other connective tissues. There are multiple
intrauterine fractures of long bones, which have a crumpled appearance on radiographs. There are striking micromelia and bowing of

extremities; the legs are held abducted at right angles to the body in the
frogleg position. Multiple rib fractures create a beaded appearance, and
the small thorax contributes to respiratory insufficiency. The skull is large
for body size, with enlarged anterior and posterior fontanels. Sclerae are
dark blue-­gray. The cerebral cortex has multiple neuronal migration and
other defects (agyria, gliosis, periventricular leukomalacia).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 742 u Osteogenesis Imperfecta 4361

A

B

Fig. 742.2 Typical features of type III osteogenesis imperfecta radio-

graphs in a 6-­yr-­old child. A, Lower long bones are osteoporotic, with
metaphyseal flaring, “popcorn” formation at growth plates, and placement of intramedullary rods. B, Vertebral bodies are compressed and
osteoporotic.

Fig. 742.1 Infant with type III osteogenesis imperfecta displays short-

ened bowed extremities, thoracic deformity, and relative macrocephaly.

Osteogenesis Imperfecta Type III (Progressive
Deforming)

OI type III is the most severe nonlethal form of OI and results in significant physical disability. Birthweight and length are often low normal. Fractures usually occur in utero. There is relative macrocephaly
and triangular facies (Fig. 742.1). Postnatally, fractures occur from
inconsequential trauma and heal with deformity. Disorganization of
the bone matrix results in a “popcorn” appearance at the metaphyses
(Fig. 742.2). The rib cage has flaring at the base, and pectus deformity
is frequent. Virtually all type III patients have scoliosis and vertebral
compression. Growth falls below the curve by the first year; all type III
patients have extreme short stature. Scleral hue ranges from white to
blue. Dentinogenesis imperfecta, hearing loss, and kyphoscoliosis may
be present or develop over time.

bone deformity because BMP1 has other substrates in addition to type
I collagen.
Defects in removal of the type I procollagen N-­propeptide cause a
distinctive combination of Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome and OI. Deletion
of exon six, containing the cleavage site, causes EDS type VII. Glycine
substitutions near the cleavage site impair processing by altering the
site configuration, causing hyperextensibility of large and small joints
and variable bone fragility.

Osteogenesis Imperfecta Type V (Hyperplastic
Callus) and Type VI Hyperosteoidosis (Mineralization
Defect)

Patients with OI type IV can present at birth with in utero fractures
or bowing of lower long bones. They can also present with recurrent
fractures after ambulation and have normal to moderate short stature.
Most children have moderate bowing even with infrequent fractures.
Children with OI type IV require orthopedic and rehabilitation intervention, but they are usually able to attain community ambulation
skills. Fracture rates decrease after puberty. Radiographically, they are
osteoporotic and have metaphyseal flaring and vertebral compressions.
Scleral hue may be blue or white.

Types V and VI OI patients clinically have OI similar in skeletal severity to types IV and III, respectively, but they have distinct findings on
bone histology. Type V patients also usually have some combination
of hyperplastic callus, calcification of the interosseous membrane of
the forearm, and/or a radiodense metaphyseal band. They constitute
<5% of OI cases. All type V OI patients are heterozygous for the same
pathogenic variant in IFITM5, which generates a novel start codon for
the bone protein BRIL. Ligamentous laxity may be present; blue sclera
or dentinogenesis imperfecta are not present. Patients with type VI OI
have progressive deforming OI that does not manifest at birth. They
have distinctive bone histology with broad osteoid seams and fish-­scale
lamellation under polarized light, caused by deficiency of pigment epithelium derived factor, encoded by SERPINF1. Types V and VI are
connected in intracellular osteoblast pathways—SERPINF1 transcripts
are increased in type V OI, while IFITM5 transcripts are decreased in
type VI OI.

Defects in the Processing of Type I Procollagen
Propeptides

Osteogenesis Imperfecta Types VII, VIII, and IX
(Autosomal Recessive)

Osteogenesis Imperfecta Type IV (Moderately
Severe)

Autosomal dominant pathogenic variants in the C-­propeptide cleavage
site of procollagen or recessive defects in BMP1, the enzyme responsible for its cleavage, cause bone fragility with normal or elevated dual-­
energy x-­ray absorptiometry bone density z scores. Individuals with
dominant pathogenic variants have normal stature, white sclerae and
teeth, and mild to moderate OI. Null pathogenic variants in BMP1 lead
to a more severe skeletal phenotype with short stature, scoliosis, and

Types VII and VIII patients overlap clinically with types II and III
OI but have distinct features including white sclerae, rhizomelia, and
small to normal head circumference. Surviving children have severe
osteochondrodysplasia with extreme short stature and dual-­energy
x-­ray absorptiometry L1-­L2 z score in the −6 to −7 range. Type IX OI is
very rare; most cases are lethal, but some have moderate skeletal severity without rhizomelia, and white sclerae.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4362 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Osteogenesis Imperfecta Types X and XI (Autosomal
Recessive)

There have been several reports of severe to lethal type X OI caused
by defects affecting the serine-­type endopeptidase inhibitor domain
of HSP47. This domain is responsible for the HSP47 chaperone function that helps to maintain the folded state of procollagen heterotrimers. HSP47 and FKBP65, the protein responsible for type XI
OI, cooperate in collagen synthesis. Type XI OI is a more prevalent
recessive form with a moderate to severe skeletal phenotype, including white sclerae and normal teeth. Congenital contractures of large
joints may occur with the same pathogenic variants that cause only
skeletal fragility, even in sibships. At the opposite end of the spectrum, a deletion of a single tyrosine residue causes Kuskokwim syndrome, a congenital contracture disorder with very mild vertebral
findings and osteopenia. Defects in FKBP10 decrease collagen crosslinking in matrix because FKBP65 is the foldase for lysyl hydroxylase
2, which hydroxylates collagen telopeptide residues important for
cross linking.

Defects in Osteoblast Differentiation
(Types XIII-­XXII OI)

The most recent functional grouping of genes causing recessive OI
(types XIII to XXII) affect osteoblast differentiation and are collagen related. SP7 (type XIII OI) regulates osteoblast differentiation
and is critical for bone formation. TMEM38B (type XIV OI) defects
are clinically indistinguishable from type IV OI. TMEM38B encodes
the endoplasmic reticulum membrane cation channel TRIC-­B, which
affects calcium flux from the endoplasmic reticulum to the cytoplasm. Since many enzymes involved in collagen metabolism are
calcium dependent, collagen synthesis is globally dysregulated in the
absence of TRIC-­B, with significant intracellular retention. Collagen
posttranslational modification is also impaired, leading to underhydroxylation of the collagen helix. Recessive WNT1 (type XV OI)
defects cause severe progressive deforming OI. Notably, Wnt signaling pathway activation through the Frizzled receptor on the osteoblast surface increases bone mass, and deficiency of Wnt decreases it.
SPARC (type XVII OI), also known as osteonectin, is a glycoprotein
component of extracellular matrix. Defects in residues important for
SPARC binding to collagen were reported in two cases of moderate
to severe OI.
The genes MBTPS2 and CREB3L1, causing types XVIII and XVI
OI, respectively, encode proteins involved in regulated intramembrane
proteolysis (RIP). MBTPS2 encodes the transmembrane Golgi protein
site-2 protease (S2P), that acts in succession with S1P to activate regulatory molecules in times of cell stress. OASIS, encoded by CREB3L1,
is an RIP substrate.
Interestingly, missense substitutions in S2P in OI patients result
in underhydroxylation of the collagen lysine residue important for
crosslinking of collagen in matrix, thus impairing bone strength.
In OASIS-­null mice, collagen transcription has been shown to be
impaired.
Defects in TENT5A, MESD, KDELR2, and CCDC134 have been
reported in small numbers of individuals with lethal or severe OI
skeletal phenotypes. The products of these genes are not known to
interact directly with collagen. TENT5A encodes FAM46A, a cytoplasmic poly(A) polymerase with an unexpected role in bone mineralization, likely related to its role as a binding partner for SMADs,
modulating BMP signaling. MESD acts along the Wnt pathway,
serving as an endoplastic reticulum chaperone for the low-density
lipoprotein receptors LRP5 and LRP6. Oligodontia and intellectual
disability occur in some patients. Bone histology shows enlarged
osteocytes and irregular matrix mineralization.
Pathogenic variants in KDELR2 cause neurodevelopmental and
severe skeletal defects. Pathogenic variants in CCDC134 add to the
skeletal effects by impacting the mitogen-activated protein kinase/
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (MAPK/ERK) pathway. Expression of type I collagen is reduced, as is osteoblast in vitro mineralization, but histomorphometry is atypical for OI.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

DNA sequencing is the first diagnostic laboratory test, and several
Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA)-­
certified
sequencing labs offer panels to test for dominant and recessive OI.
Pathogenic variant identification is useful to determine the type with
certainty and to facilitate family screening and prenatal diagnosis. It is
also possible to screen for type VI OI by the determination of serum
pigment epithelium-­derived factor level, which is severely reduced in
this type.
If dermal fibroblasts are obtained, they can be useful for determining
the level of transcripts of the candidate gene and for collagen biochemical
testing, which is positive for overmodification in most cases of types I-­IV
and IX OI, and in all cases of VII/VIII OI, and for undermodification in
type XIV. In OI type I, the reduced amount of type I collagen results in an
increase in the ratio of type III to type I collagen on gel electrophoresis.
Severe OI can be detected prenatally by level II ultrasonography as
early as 16 weeks of gestation. OI and thanatophoric dysplasia may be
confused. Fetal ultrasonography might not detect OI type IV and rarely
detects OI type I. For recurrent cases, chorionic villus biopsy can be
used for biochemical or molecular studies. Amniocytes produce false-­
positive biochemical studies but can be used for molecular studies in
appropriate cases.
In the neonatal period, the normal to elevated alkaline phosphatase
levels present in OI distinguish it from hypophosphatasia. During the
school-­age period, children with type VI OI have notably elevated
serum alkaline phosphatase.

COMPLICATIONS

The morbidity and mortality of OI are cardiopulmonary. Recurrent
pneumonias and declining pulmonary function occur in childhood,
and cor pulmonale is seen in adults.
Neurologic complications include basilar invagination, brainstem
compression, hydrocephalus, and syringohydromyelia. Many children
with OI types III and IV have basilar invagination, but brainstem compression is uncommon. Basilar invagination is best detected with spiral
CT of the craniocervical junction (Fig. 742.3).

TREATMENT

There is no cure for OI. For severe nonlethal OI, active physical rehabilitation in the early years allows children to attain a higher functional
level than orthopedic management alone. Children with OI type I and

Fig. 742.3 Typical feature of basilar invagination shown in the sagittal
MRI of an asymptomatic child with type III osteogenesis imperfecta.
There is invagination of the odontoid above the Chamberlain line, causing compression and kinking at the pontomedullary junction (arrow).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 743 u Marfan Syndrome 4363
some with type IV are spontaneous ambulators. Children with types
III, IV, V, VI, and XI OI benefit from gait aids and a program of swimming and conditioning. Severely affected patients require a wheelchair
for community mobility but can acquire transfer and self-­care skills.
Teens with OI can require psychologic support with body image issues.
Growth hormone improves bone histology in growth-­responsive children (usually types I and IV).
Orthopedic management of OI is aimed at fracture management
and correction of deformity to enable function. Fractures should be
promptly splinted or cast; OI fractures heal well, and cast removal
should be aimed at minimizing immobilization osteoporosis. Correction of long-­bone deformity requires an osteotomy procedure and
placement of an intramedullary rod.
A several-­
year course of treatment of children with OI with
bisphosphonates (IV pamidronate or oral olpadronate or risedronate) confers some benefits. Bisphosphonates decrease bone resorption by osteoclasts; OI patients have increased bone volume that still
contains the defective collagen. Bisphosphonates are more beneficial for vertebrae (trabecular bone) than long bones (cortical bone).
Treatment for 1-2 years results in increased L1-­L4 dual-­energy x-­ray
absorptiometry and, more importantly, improved vertebral compressions and area. However, follow-­up of bisphosphonate-­treated children has shown that the incidence of scoliosis is unchanged even in
children treated early, although there was a modest delay in progression in type III OI. The relative risk of long-­bone fractures is modestly decreased by several years of bisphosphonates. However, the
material properties of long bones are weakened by prolonged treatment and nonunion after osteotomy is increased. There is no effect of
bisphosphonates on mobility scores, muscle strength, or bone pain.
Limiting treatment duration to 2-3 years in mid-­childhood can maximize the benefits and minimize the detriment to cortical material
properties. Benefits appear to persist several years after the treatment
interval, and alternation of treatment intervals and drug holidays
may be beneficial. Side effects include abnormal long-­bone remodeling, increased incidence of fracture nonunion, and osteopetrotic-­like
brittleness to bone.
Antibodies to sclerostin and TGF-­β stimulate osteoblasts to produce
bone matrix. They have shown promise in murine models for OI and
are currently in trials for children with OI. TGF-beta signaling may
be a pathogenic mechanism in OI. Fresolimumab, a TGF-beta neutralizing antibody, treatment in adults with OI type IV demonstrated
increases in lumbar spine bone mineral density.

PROGNOSIS

OI is a chronic condition that may limit both life span and functional
level. Infants with OI type II usually die within months to 1 year
of life. An occasional child with radiographic type II and extreme
growth deficiency survives to the teen years. Persons with OI type III
have a reduced life span with clusters of mortality from pulmonary
causes in early childhood, the teen years, and the 40s. OI types I, IV,
and V OI are compatible with a full life span. The oldest reported
individuals with type VIII are in their third decade, and some with
type XI are in their fourth decade. The long-­term prognosis for most
recessive types is still emerging, and many adults with OI have not
had molecular testing.
Individuals with OI type III are usually wheelchair dependent. With
aggressive rehabilitation, they can attain transfer skills and household
ambulation. OI type IV children usually attain community ambulation
skills either independently or with gait aids.

GENETIC COUNSELING

For autosomal dominant OI, the risk of an affected individual passing
the gene to the individual’s offspring is 50%. An affected child usually
has about the same severity of OI as the parent; however, there is variability of expression, and the child’s condition can be either more or
less severe than that of the parent. The empirical recurrence risk to an
apparently unaffected couple of having a second child with OI is 5–7%;
this is the statistical chance that one parent has germline mosaicism.
The collagen pathogenic variant in the mosaic parent is present in some

germ cells and may be present in somatic tissues. If a parent is a mosaic
carrier, the risk of recurrence may be as high as 50%.
For recessive OI, the recurrence risk is 25% per pregnancy. No
known individual with severe nonlethal recessive OI has had a child.
For X-­linked type XVIII OI, the risk to male offspring of carrier women
is generally 50%.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Section 4

Connective Tissue
Disorders
Chapter 743

Marfan Syndrome
Jefferson J. Doyle and Harry C. Dietz III
Marfan syndrome (MFS) is an inherited systemic, connective tissue
disorder caused by pathogenic variants in the FBN1 gene encoding the
extracellular matrix (ECM) protein fibrillin-1. It is primarily associated with skeletal, cardiovascular, and ocular pathology. The diagnosis
is based on clinical findings, some of which are age dependent.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The incidence is estimated at 1 in 10,000 live births, and approximately
25% of cases are sporadic. The disorder shows autosomal dominant
inheritance, with high penetrance but variable expression. Both interfamilial and intrafamilial clinical variation are common. There is no
racial or gender preference.

PATHOGENESIS

MFS is associated with abnormal production, matrix deposition, and/
or stability of fibrillin-1, a 350-­kd ECM protein that is the major constituent of microfibrils, with prominent disruption of microfibrils and
elastic fibers in diseased tissues. The fibrillin-1 (FBN1) gene is composed of 65 exons. Linkage analysis has suggested an absence of locus
heterogeneity, and the involvement of FBN1 is demonstrated in >90%
of cases, with more than 1,000 disease-­causing pathogenic variants
identified to date (the majority of which are pathogenic missense variants unique to a given family). With the exception of early-­onset and
severe presentations of the disease associated with pathogenic variants
in exons 26-27 and 31-32, no clear genotype-­phenotype correlation
has been identified. Given that there is considerable intrafamilial variability, genetic, epigenetic, environmental, or other unidentified factors
may influence expression of the disease.
The transforming growth factor beta (TGF-­β) family of cytokines
influences a diverse repertoire of cellular processes, including cell
proliferation, migration, differentiation, survival, and synthetic activity. The TGF-­β ligands (TGF-­β1, TGF-­β2, or TGF-­β3) are synthesized
as inactive precursor complexes and sequestered by ECM proteins,
including fibrillin-1. Mice heterozygous for a pathogenic variant in
the fibrillin-1 gene, typical of those that cause MFS in humans, display
many of the classic features of MFS, including aortic root aneurysm,
which associates with a tissue signature for increased TGF-­β signaling,
suggesting that pathogenic variants in fibrillin-1 lead to increased TGF-­
β activation and signaling. Furthermore, pharmacologic antagonism

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4364 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
of TGF-­β signaling initiated after the first few weeks of life ameliorates aortic aneurysm in mouse models of MFS, demonstrating that
high TGF-­β signaling is a cause rather than a consequence of disease
progression.
Increased TGF-­β signaling has been observed in other tissues in
MFS mice, including the developing lung, mitral valve, and skeletal
muscle. Treatment of these mice with agents that antagonize TGF-­β
attenuates or prevents pulmonary emphysema, myxomatous degeneration of the mitral valve, and skeletal muscle myopathy. The prominent
role of TGF-­β dysregulation in the pathogenesis of MFS was further
validated by the discovery and characterization of another related
aortic aneurysm syndrome, Loeys-­Dietz syndrome (LDS), in which
patients have pathogenic variants in the genes encoding positive effectors of TGF-­β signaling, including the ligands TGF-­β2 or TGF-­β3,
either subunit of the TGF-­β receptor (TβRI or TβRII) or the intracellular signaling intermediates SMAD2 or SMAD3. Patients with LDS
share many overlapping clinical features with MFS (see the section on
“Differential Diagnosis”). This is further supported by data showing
that Shprintzen-­Goldberg syndrome (SGS), which shows phenotypic
overlap with both MFS and LDS, is caused by pathogenic variants in
SKI, a known repressor of the TGF-­β transcriptional response.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

MFS is a multisystem disorder, with cardinal manifestations in the
skeletal, cardiovascular, and ocular systems.

Skeletal System

Overgrowth of the long bones (dolichostenomelia) is often the most
obvious manifestation of MFS and may produce a reduced upper segment–to–lower segment ratio (UL/LS) or an arm span–to–height ratio
>1.05 times. Abnormal ratios are US/LS <1 for age 0-5 years, US/LS
<0.95 for 6-7 years, US/LS <0.9 for 8-9 years, and US/LS <0.85 above
age 10 years. Anterior chest deformity is likely the result of excessive
rib growth, pushing the sternum either outward (pectus carinatum)
or inward (pectus excavatum). Abnormal curvatures of the spine
(most commonly thoracolumbar scoliosis) may also partly result from
increased vertebral growth. Other skeletal features include an inward
bulging of the acetabulum into the pelvic cavity (protrusio acetabuli),
flat feet (pes planus), and joint hypermobility (Fig. 743.1) or joint contractures. Long and slender fingers in relation to the palm of the hand

B

A

C

(arachnodactyly) are generally a subjective finding. The combination
of arachnodactyly and hypermobile joints is examined by the Walker-­
Murdoch or wrist sign, which is positive if there is full overlap of the
distal phalanges of the thumb and fifth finger when wrapped around
the contralateral wrist (see Fig. 743.1), and the Steinberg or thumb sign,
which is present when the distal phalanx of the thumb fully extends
beyond the ulnar border of the hand when folded across the palm (see
Fig. 743.1). Contracture of the fingers (camptodactyly) and elbows is
commonly observed. A selection of craniofacial manifestations may be
present, including a long narrow skull (dolichocephaly), deeply set eyes
(enophthalmos), recessed lower mandible (retrognathia) or small chin
(micrognathia), flattening of the midface (malar hypoplasia), a high-­
arching palate, and downward-­slanting palpebral fissures (Fig. 743.2).

Cardiovascular System

Thickening of the atrioventricular valves is common and often associated with valvular prolapse. Variable degrees of regurgitation may be
present. In children with early-­onset and severe MFS, insufficiency of
the mitral valve can lead to heart failure, pulmonary hypertension, and
death in infancy. This manifestation is the leading cause of morbidity
and mortality in young children with the disorder. Supraventricular
arrhythmias may be seen in association with mitral valve dysfunction.
Ventricular dysrhythmias have also been described in children with
MFS, and there is an increased prevalence of prolonged QT interval.
Dilated cardiomyopathy occurs with increased prevalence in patients
with MFS, most often attributed to volume overload imposed by valve
regurgitation. Aortic valve dysfunction is generally a late occurrence
and attributed to stretching of the aortic annulus by an expanding aortic root aneurysm.
Aortic aneurysm, dissection, and rupture, principally at the level
of the sinuses of Valsalva (also known as the aortic root), remain the
most life-­threatening manifestations of MFS, prompting lifelong monitoring by echocardiography or other imaging modalities. In severe
cases, the aneurysm may be present in utero, but in mild examples it
may be absent or never exceed dimensions that require clinical intervention. Aortic dimensions must be interpreted in comparison to
age-­dependent nomograms. The most important risk factor for aortic
dissection is the maximal aortic root size and a positive family history.
The characteristic histologic findings from aortas of patients with MFS
include cystic medial necrosis of the tunica media and disruption of

D

E

Fig. 743.1 Marfan syndrome. Note the joint laxity (A), Steinberg thumb sign (B), ability to join thumb and fifth finger around the wrist (Walker-­
Murdoch sign) (C), pes planus (D), and striae over hips and back (E). (From Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of
Human Malformation, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2022; Fig. 2, p. 664.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 743 u Marfan Syndrome 4365
Table 743.1  Diagnostic Criteria for Marfan Syndrome
IN THE ABSENCE OF A FAMILY HISTORY OF MFS, A DIAGNOSIS
CAN BE ESTABLISHED IN FOUR DISTINCT SCENARIOS:
1.	Aortic root z score ≥2 AND ectopia lentis*
2.	Aortic root z score ≥2 AND a bona fide FBN1 pathogenic variant
(see Table 743.2)
3.	Aortic root z score ≥2 AND a systemic score ≥7* (see Table 743.3)
4. Ectopia lentis AND a bona fide FBN1 pathogenic variant known
to cause aortic disease
IN THE PRESENCE OF A FAMILY HISTORY OF MFS, A DIAGNOSIS
CAN BE ESTABLISHED IN THE PRESENCE OF:
1.	Ectopia lentis
2.	A systemic score ≥7*
3.	Aortic root z score ≥2 if older than 20 years or ≥3 if younger than
20 years*
IN THE ABSENCE OF A FAMILY HISTORY OF MFS, ALTERNATIVE
DIAGNOSES INCLUDE:
1. Ectopia lentis ± systemic score AND FBN1 pathogenic variant not
known to associate with aortic aneurysm or no FBN1 pathogenic
variant = Ectopia lentis syndrome
2.	Aortic root z score <2 AND a systemic score ≥5 (with at least one
skeletal feature) without ectopia lentis = MASS phenotype
3. Mitral valve prolapse AND aortic root z score <2 AND a systemic
score <5 without ectopia lentis = Mitral valve prolapse syndrome
*Denotes caveat that features suggestive of an alternative diagnosis must be
excluded and appropriate alternative molecular testing should be performed. Other
syndromes include Shprintzen-­Goldberg, Loeys-­Dietz, or vascular Ehlers Danlos (see
Table 743.4 for genes).

Other Systems

Fig. 743.2 Marfan syndrome. Note the long slim limbs, pectus ex-

cavatum, narrow face, and reduced elbow extension. (From Jones KL,
Jones MC, Del Campo M. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human
Malformation, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2022: Fig. 1A, p. 662.)

elastic lamellae. Cystic medial necrosis describes the focal apoptosis
and disappearance of vascular smooth muscle cells and elastic fibers
from the tunica media of the aortic wall, and subsequent deposition
of mucin-­like material in the cystic space. These changes produce a
thicker, less distensible and stiffer aorta, which is more prone to aortic
dissection. Most patients experiencing acute aortic dissection present
with classic symptoms, including sudden-­onset, severe, tearing chest
pain, often radiating into the back. The dissection typically starts at the
aortic root and may remain confined to the ascending aorta (type II) or
continue into the descending aorta (type I). Acute-­onset heart failure
may occur if aortic valve function is compromised, and patients may
suffer cerebrovascular injury, depending on the involvement of the
carotid arteries. Involvement of the coronary arteries may herald sudden cardiac death, secondary to myocardial infarction or rupture into
the pericardial sac with subsequent pericardial tamponade. Chronic
aortic dissection usually occurs more insidiously, often without chest
pain. Dilatation of the main pulmonary artery is common but does not
typically cause any clinical sequelae. Enlargement of the descending
thoracic or abdominal aorta can also occur, although relatively rarely.

Ocular System

Dislocation of the ocular lens (ectopia lentis, EL) occurs in around
60–70% of patients, although it is not unique to the disorder. Other
ocular manifestations include early and severe myopia, thin and flat
cornea, increased axial length of the globe, and iris dilator muscle
hypoplasia, which results in poor dilation (miosis). Patients are also
predisposed to retinal detachment, early cataracts, glaucoma, strabismus, and amblyopia.

There is an increased incidence of pulmonary disease in MFS; progressive
anterior chest deformity or thoracic scoliosis may contribute to a restrictive pattern of lung disease. Furthermore, a widening of the distal airspaces
predisposes patients to spontaneous pneumothorax, which occurs in up to
15% of patients. Assessment of pulmonary volumes and function should
account for long-­bone overgrowth affecting the lower extremities, which
can lead to a reduction in the normalized forced vital capacity and total
lung capacity. If normalized to thoracic size or sitting height, pulmonary
function testing is often normal in patients with the disorder.
MFS patients typically have normal skin texture and elasticity. The
most common skin finding is stretch marks—pinkish, scarlike lesions that
later become white (striae atrophicae), which occur in about one third of
patients (Fig. 743.1). These may occur in the absence of obesity, rapid gain
in muscle mass, or pregnancy, and at sites not associated with increased
skin distention (i.e., the anterior shoulder or lower back). Another common manifestation is congenital or acquired inguinal hernia. There is
also an increased risk of surgical and recurrent hernias in the Marfan
population.
Widening of the dural sac or root sleeves (dural ectasia) is present in
63–92% of MFS patients. Although dural ectasia can result in lumbar
back pain, it is often asymptomatic and should be assessed by lumbosacral imaging with CT or MRI.

DIAGNOSIS

Given the complexity of the clinical examination in MFS and the relevant
differential diagnoses, evaluation should be coordinated by a professional
with extensive experience, such as a geneticist, cardiologist, or ophthalmologist. The diagnosis is based on a defined set of clinical criteria drawn
up by an international panel of experts (the revised Ghent nosology for the
MFS; Table 743.1).
In the absence of a conclusive family history of MFS, the diagnosis
can be established in four distinct scenarios:
1.	The presence of either aortic root dilatation when standardized to
age and body size (an aortic root z score ≥2) or aortic dissection
combined with ectopia lentis allows for the unequivocal diagnosis of
MFS, irrespective of the presence or absence of any systemic features
(see Table 743.1), except when these are indicative of an alternative
diagnosis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4366 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 743.2  Criteria for Causal FBN1 Pathogenic Variant
• Pathogenic variant previously shown to segregate in a Marfan
family
• Any one of the following de novo pathogenic variants (with
proven parentage and absence of disease in parents):
• Nonsense pathogenic variant
• In-­frame and out-­of-­frame deletion/insertion
• Splice site pathogenic variants affecting canonical splice
sequence or shown to alter splicing on mRNA/cDNA level
• Missense pathogenic variant affecting/creating cysteine
residues
• Missense pathogenic variant affecting conserved residues
of the EGF consensus sequence ((D/N)X(D/N)(E/Q)Xm(D/N)
Xn(Y/F) with m and n representing variable number of residues;
D aspartic acid, N asparagine, E glutamic acid, Q glutamine, Y
tyrosine, F phenylalanine)
• Other missense pathogenic variants: segregation in family
if possible AND absence in 400 ethnically matched control
chromosomes; if no family history, absence in 400 ethnically
matched control chromosomes
• Linkage of haplotype for n ≥ 6 meioses to the FBN1 locus
From Loeys BL, Dietz HC, Braverman AC, et al. The revised Ghent nosology for the
Marfan syndrome. J Med Genet. 2010;47:476–485.

without documented evidence of a bona fide FBN1 pathogenic variant,
the term “nonspecific connective tissue disorder” is recommended. In
those instances in which an FBN1 pathogenic variant is identified, the
term potential MFS should be used instead.
In an individual with a positive family history of MFS (in which a
family member has been independently diagnosed using the previously
described criteria), the diagnosis can be established in the presence of:
1.	Ectopia lentis
2.	A systemic score ≥7 points (see Table 743.3)
3.	Aortic root dilatation with z score ≥2 in adults (≥20 years old) or z
score ≥3 in individuals <20 years old
In the case of scenarios 2 and 3, previously, features suggestive of an
alternative diagnosis must again be excluded and appropriate alternative molecular testing should be performed.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis of MFS includes disorders with aortic aneurysm (LDS, familial thoracic aortic aneurysm syndrome, and SGS),
ectopia lentis (ectopia lentis syndrome, Weil-­Marchesani syndrome,
and homocystinuria), or systemic manifestations of MFS (congenital
contractural arachnodactyly [CCA] and mitral valve, aorta, skin, skeletal [MASS] phenotype); Table 743.4).

Aortic Aneurysm Syndromes
Table 743.3  Scoring of Systemic Features in Points
• Wrist AND thumb sign = 3 (wrist OR thumb sign = 1)
• Pectus carinatum deformity = 2 (pectus excavatum or chest
asymmetry = 1)
• Hind foot deformity = 2 (plain pes planus = 1)
• Pneumothorax = 2
• Dural ectasia = 2
• Protrusio acetabuli = 2
• Reduced US/LS AND increased arm/height AND no severe
scoliosis = 1
• Scoliosis or thoracolumbar kyphosis = 1
• Reduced elbow extension = 1
• Facial features (3/5) = 1 (dolichocephaly, enophthalmos, downslanting palpebral fissures, midface hypoplasia, retrognathia)
• Skin striae = 1
• Myopia >3 diopters = 1
• Mitral valve prolapse (all types) = 1
Maximum total: 20 points; score ≥7 indicates systemic involvement.
US/LS, Upper segment/lower segment ratio.

2.	The presence of aortic root dilatation (z score ≥2) or aortic dissection and the identification of a bona fide FBN1 pathogenic variant
(Table 743.2) are sufficient to establish the diagnosis even if ectopia
lentis is absent.
3.	When aortic root dilatation (an aortic root z score ≥2) or aortic dissection is present, but ectopia lentis is absent and the FBN1 status is
either unknown or negative, the diagnosis may be confirmed by the
presence of sufficient systemic findings (a systemic score ≥7 points;
Table 743.3). However, features suggestive of an alternative diagnosis
must be excluded, and the appropriate alternative molecular testing
should be performed.
4.	In the presence of ectopia lentis, but absence of aortic root dilatation or aortic dissection, an FBN1 pathogenic variant, which has
previously been associated with aortic disease, is required before the
diagnosis can be made. If the FBN1 pathogenic variant is not unequivocally associated with cardiovascular disease in either a related
or unrelated proband, the patient should be classified as “isolated ectopia lentis syndrome” (see the section on “Differential Diagnosis”).
Despite these diagnostic criteria, on occasion sporadic cases in individuals <20 years old may not fit in one of the four proposed scenarios
detailed above. If insufficient systemic features (systemic score <7)
and/or borderline aortic root measurements (z score <3) are present

LDS is a systemic connective tissue disorder characterized by the
triad of arterial tortuosity and aggressive aneurysm disease, hypertelorism, and bifid uvula or cleft palate, as well as many of the craniofacial and skeletal features found in MFS. Distinction between
MFS and LDS is important because aneurysms tend to dissect at
younger ages and smaller dimensions in LDS patients, necessitating more aggressive management. LDS was originally classified into
type 1 or type 2, depending on whether the pathogenic variant is
present in the TGFBR1 or TGFBR2 gene, which encode the type
1 or type 2 TGF-­β receptor subunits, respectively. LDS type 3 is
caused by heterozygous pathogenic variants in the gene encoding
the TGF-­
β–dependent intracellular signaling molecule SMAD3.
LDS type 4 is caused by heterozygous pathogenic variants in the
extracellular TGF-­β receptor ligand TGF-­β2, whereas LDS type 5
is caused by heterozygous pathogenic variants in the extracellular
TGF-­β receptor ligand TGF-­β3. LDS type 6 is caused by heterozygous pathogenic variants in the gene encoding the TGF-­β–dependent intracellular signaling molecule SMAD2. As a general rule, the
severity of disease associated with the different forms of LDS can
be summarized: LDS1 = LDS2 > LDS3 > LDS4 = LDS5 > LDS6.
There are exceptions to this rule, mandating careful monitoring of
all patients with LDS. Notably, there can be wide clinical variation
within each subtype, including between family members harboring
the identical pathogenic variant.
Like MFS, familial thoracic aortic aneurysm syndrome segregates as an autosomal dominant trait characterized by aortic root
aneurysm and dissection. However, other systemic manifestations
of MFS are typically absent, and the disorder has reduced penetrance. Disease-­causing heterozygous pathogenic variants have been
identified in several genes with roles in the vascular smooth muscle contractile apparatus, including MYH11, ACTA2, and MYLK,
which encode smooth muscle myosin heavy chain 11, vascular
smooth muscle α-­actin, and myosin light chain kinase. However,
these genes account for only a fraction of cases of nonsyndromic
familial thoracic aortic aneurysm. In most cases, the management
principles that have been generated for MFS have proved effective
for this form of familial aortic aneurysm.
SGS is a systemic connective tissue disorder that includes virtually all the craniofacial, skeletal, skin, and cardiovascular manifestations of MFS and LDS, with the additional findings of developmental
delay and severe skeletal muscle hypotonia. Most cases are caused
by heterozygous pathogenic variants in the SKI gene, which encodes
an intracellular repressor of TGF-­β signaling. Vascular involvement
tends to be less prevalent and less severe when compared with MFS
or LDS.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 743 u Marfan Syndrome 4367
Table 743.4  Differential Diagnosis of Marfan Syndrome
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS (GENES)

CARDIAC FEATURES

AORTIC ANEURYSM SYNDROMES
Loeys-­Dietz syndromes (types I-­V)
(OMIM: 609192)
TGFBR1, TGFBR2, SMAD3, TGFB2,
TGFB3

• Patent ductus
arteriosus
• Atrial septal defect
• Bicuspid aortic valve

• Aortic root aneurysm
• Arterial tortuosity
• Widespread aneurysms
• Vascular dissection at relatively
young ages and small aortic
dimensions

• Hypertelorism
• Cleft palate
• Broad or bifid uvula
• Craniosynostosis
• Midface hypoplasia
• Blue sclerae
• Arachnodactyly
• Pectus deformity
• Scoliosis
• Joint hypermobility
• Pes planus
• Rarely easy bruising
• Dystrophic scars
• Translucent skin
• Rarely developmental delay

Familial thoracic aortic aneurysm
(OMIM: 132900)
TGFBR2, ACTA2, others

• Generally none
• Rare forms with patent
ductus arteriosus

• Aortic root aneurysm
• Ascending aortic aneurysm

• Generally none
• Rarely livedo reticularis and iris
flocculi

Shprintzen-­Goldberg syndrome
(OMIM: 182212)
SKI, unknown others

None

Aortic root aneurysm

• Hypertelorism
• Craniosynostosis
• Arched palate
• Arachnodactyly
• Pectus deformity
• Scoliosis
• Joint hypermobility
• Developmental delay

Bicuspid aortic valve with aortic
aneurysm (OMIM: 109730)
ACTA2

Bicuspid aortic valve

• Aortic root aneurysm
• Ascending aortic aneurysm

Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome, type IV
(OMIM: 130050)
COL3A1

Mitral valve prolapse

• Aneurysm and rupture of any
medium to large muscular artery
• No predisposition for aortic root
enlargement

• Joint hypermobility
• Atrophic scars
• Translucent skin
• Easy bruising
• Hernias
• Rupture of hollow organs

None

None

Nonspecific skeletal features

Mitral valve prolapse

Intravascular thrombosis

• Tall stature
• Ectopia lentis
• Long-­bone overgrowth
• Developmental delay

Borderline or nonprogressive

• Nonspecific skin and skeletal
findings
• Myopia

ECTOPIA LENTIS SYNDROMES
Familial ectopia lentis (OMIM: 129600)
FBN1, LTBP2, ADAMTSL4
Homocystinuria (OMIM: 236200)
CBS

SYNDROMES WITH SYSTEMIC MANIFESTATIONS OF MFS
MASS (mitral valve, aorta, skeleton, skin) Mitral valve prolapse
phenotype (OMIM: 604308)
FBN1

Ectopia Lentis Syndromes

Both ectopia lentis syndrome and Weill-­Marchesani syndrome
(WMS) may also be caused by heterozygous pathogenic variants in
FBN1. Compound heterozygous or homozygous pathogenic variants at a second locus, ADAMTSL4 cause ectopia lentis syndrome
associated with slightly younger age at diagnosis. Interestingly,
some FBN1 pathogenic variants can be associated with classic MFS,
ectopia lentis syndrome, and ectopia lentis combined with skin, but
not cardiovascular, manifestations of MFS, suggesting that these
presentations are part of a spectrum of clinical features of the same
disease, and highlighting the potential contribution of genetic modifiers of disease.
WMS is a systemic connective tissue disorder characterized by skin, skeletal, and ocular abnormalities, including

VASCULAR FEATURES

SYSTEMIC FEATURES

microspherophakia, ectopia lentis, and myopia. Features inconsistent with the diagnosis of MFS include short stature and brachydactyly. In addition to FBN1 pathogenic variants (type 2), the syndrome
may be caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in ADAMTS10 (type
1) or in LTBP2 (type 3), which encode ADAM metallopeptidase
with thrombospondin type 1 motif 10 and latent TGF-­β binding
protein 2, respectively.
Homocystinuria is a metabolic disorder caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous pathogenic variants in the gene
encoding cystathionine β-­synthase, which leads to increases in both
homocysteine and methionine. The clinical features of untreated
homocystinuria include ectopia lentis and skeletal abnormalities resembling MFS. However, in contrast to MFS, affected persons often suffer from developmental delay, a predisposition to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4368 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
thromboembolic events, and a high incidence of coronary artery
disease. Patients with homocystinuria are not at increased risk for
aortic aneurysm.

Syndromes with Systemic Manifestations of MFS

Congenital contractural arachnodactyly (CCA) is a connective
tissue disorder caused by heterozygous pathogenic variants in the
gene encoding fibrillin-2 (FBN2). There are a number of clinical
features overlapping with MFS, including dolichostenomelia, anterior chest deformity, scoliosis, joint contractures, and arachnodactyly, as well as some craniofacial malformations, including highly
arched palate and retrognathia. In addition, both may suffer from
severe cardiovascular abnormalities leading to premature death, but
the specific cardiac anomalies are different; valvular insufficiency
and aortic root dilation are common with MFS, whereas congenital
heart defects are more common in CCA. Patients with CCA also suffer from crumpled auricular helices (a hallmark of this condition).
Many patients referred for possible MFS are found to have evidence of a systemic connective tissue disorder, including long
limbs, deformity of the thoracic cage, striae atrophicae, mitral valve
prolapse, and borderline but nonprogressive dilatation of the aortic
root, but do not meet diagnostic criteria for MFS. This constellation of features is referred to by the acronym MASS phenotype,
emphasizing the mitral, aortic, skin, and skeletal manifestations.
The MASS phenotype can segregate in large pedigrees and remain
stable over time. The diagnosis is particularly challenging in the
context of a young, sporadic patient in whom careful follow-­up is
needed to distinguish MASS phenotype from early MFS. Familial
mitral valve prolapse syndrome can also be caused by pathogenic
variants in the gene encoding fibrillin-1 and include subdiagnostic
systemic manifestations.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Laboratory studies should document a negative urinary cyanide
nitroprusside test or specific amino acid studies to exclude cystathionine β-­synthase deficiency (homocystinuria). Although it is
estimated that most, if not all, people with classic MFS have a FBN1
pathogenic variant, the large size of this gene and the extreme allelic
heterogeneity in MFS have frustrated efficient molecular diagnosis.
The yield of pathogenic variant screening varies based on technique
and clinical presentation. It remains unclear whether the “missing”
pathogenic variants are simply atypical in character or location
within FBN1 or located in another gene. Other differential diagnoses, such as MASS phenotype, EL, and WMS have been associated
with pathogenic variants in the FBN1 gene. Furthermore, it is often
difficult or impossible to predict the phenotype from the nature
or location of a FBN1 pathogenic variant in MFS. Hence molecular genetic techniques can contribute to the diagnosis, but they do
not substitute for comprehensive clinical evaluation and follow­up. Consequently, the absence or presence of a FBN1 pathogenic
variant is not sufficient to exclude or establish the diagnosis,
respectively.

MANAGEMENT

Management focuses on preventing complications and genetic
counseling. Referral to a multidisciplinary center where a geneticist with experience in MFS works in concert with subspecialists
to coordinate a rational approach to monitoring and treatment is
advisable, given the complex nature of some patients’ disease. Yearly
evaluations for cardiovascular disease, scoliosis, or ophthalmologic
problems are imperative.

CURRENT THERAPIES

Most therapies currently available or under investigation aim to diminish cardiovascular complications, which can be categorized into activity restrictions, aortic surgery, endocarditis prophylaxis, and current
pharmacologic approaches.

Activity Restrictions

Physical therapy can improve cardiovascular performance, neuromuscular tone, and psychosocial health, and so aerobic exertion in
moderation is recommended. However, strenuous physical exertion,
competitive or contact sports, and particularly isometric activities such
as weightlifting, which invoke a Valsalva maneuver, should be avoided.

Aortic Surgery

Surgical outcome is more favorable if undertaken on an elective rather
than an urgent or emergent basis (mortality of 1.5% vs 2.6% and 11.7%,
respectively). Therefore aortic surgery should be recommended for adult
patients when their aortic root diameter approaches 50 mm, and early
intervention should be considered for those with a rapid rate of enlargement (>5-10 mm/yr) or a family history of early aortic dissection. There
are no definitive criteria guiding the timing of surgery in children in
whom dissection is extremely rare, irrespective of aortic size. This has
prompted many centers to adopt the adult criterion of 50 mm, although
early surgery may be undertaken in the presence of a rapid rate of growth
(>10 mm/yr) or the emergence of significant aortic regurgitation. Preserving the native aortic valve at the time of repair is desirable to avoid
the need for lifelong anticoagulation. Mitral valve repair or replacement
is advised for severe mitral valve regurgitation with associated symptoms
or progressive left ventricular dilatation or dysfunction.

Pregnancy

There is higher risk of aortic dissection during pregnancy and particularly in the early postpartum period in women with MFS. However,
improved awareness and data have indicated the risk is low in patients
with an aortic root diameter <40 mm. Prophylactic aortic root replacement can minimize the risk of aortic dissection and death in women
with MFS who wish to become pregnant, but the risk of more distal
ascending or descending aortic dissection would not be modified by
this intervention. Work in mouse models of MFS and other vascular
connective tissue disorders has associated postpartum aortic rupture
with lactation and specifically the activity of the hormone oxytocin.
This complication can be diminished or even avoided in some mouse
models by avoiding lactation through pup removal or a pharmacologic
antagonist of the oxytocin receptor. Although more work needs to be
done in this area, we discuss the potential negative implications of lactation with women with MFS that choose to become pregnant and are
deemed to be at particularly high risk based on the personal or family
history.

Endocarditis Prophylaxis

The Professional Advisory Board of the National Marfan Foundation
believes that patients with MFS should continue to receive prophylaxis
for bacterial endocarditis, in part because it remains unknown, but
possible, that the myxomatous valves typical of MFS are a preferred
substrate for bacterial infection.

Current Pharmacologic Approaches
β-­Blockers

β-­Adrenergic receptor blockers have historically been considered the
standard of care in MFS, and multiple small observational studies have
suggested there is a protective effect on aortic root growth, with the
dose typically titrated to achieve a heart rate <100 beats/min during
submaximal exercise. Given the putative role of hemodynamic stress in
aortic dilatation and aortic dissection in MFS, these effects are attributed to the negative inotropic and chronotropic effects of β-­blockade.

Angiotensin II Receptor Type 1 Blockers

There is extensive evidence linking angiotensin II signaling to TGF-­β
activation and signaling. In a mouse model of MFS, the angiotensin II
receptor type 1 blocker (ARB) losartan was shown to completely prevent pathologic aortic root growth and to normalize both aortic wall
thickness and architecture, findings that were absent in placebo-­treated
and propranolol-­treated mice. These data suggest the potential for productive aortic wall remodeling in MFS after TGF-­β inhibition.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 744 u Ehlers-­Danlos Syndrome
In support of its relevance to humans, a retrospective study assessing
the effect of ARBs in a small cohort of pediatric patients with MFS who
had severe aortic root enlargement despite previous alternative medical therapy, showed that ARBs significantly slowed the rate of aortic
root and sinotubular junction dilatation (both of which occur in MFS),
whereas the distal ascending aorta (which does not normally become
dilated in MFS) remained unaffected. Further evidence of a beneficial
effect from losartan therapy has been provided by three prospective
clinical trials demonstrating that losartan treatment alone or in combination with β-­blockade slowed the progression of aortic root dilation
in patients with MFS.
A comparison clinical trial assessing the therapeutic benefit of
losartan versus atenolol in patients with MFS concluded that both
drugs provided significant protection against aortic growth, with no
significant difference in therapeutic effect between the two drugs
despite the use of conventional dose losartan (FDA-­approved dose
for hypertension) and an atypically high dose of atenolol (average
dose of atenolol was 1.5 times and the maximum dose was 2 times
the FDA approved upper limit for the treatment of hypertension).
Both treatment arms in this trial showed a very slow rate of aortic root growth and a significant decline in aortic root z score over
time, a performance superior to that observed in untreated Marfan
patients or in patients treated with conventional dose atenolol (1–2
mg/kg/day). These data strongly suggest that both modalities have
therapeutic roles in patients with MFS.
Additional prospective studies have demonstrated therapeutic
benefit of ARBs. A meta-­analysis integrating seven randomized
prospective trials and over 1,500 patients concluded that ARBs
are both efficacious and safe in MFS, either when used alone (in
comparison to placebo) or in combination with β-­blockers (in comparison to β-­blockers alone). An 8-­year follow-­up of a Dutch study
exploring the use of ARBs in adults with MFS suggested that this
treatment not only suppressed pathologic aortic growth but also
positively influenced important patient outcomes, including risk of
surgery, aortic dissection, and all-­cause mortality.

PROGNOSIS

The major cause of mortality is aortic root dilatation, dissection,
and rupture, with the majority of fatal events occurring in the third
and fourth decades of life. A reevaluation of life expectancy in
MFS suggested that early diagnosis and refined medical and surgical management has greatly improved the prognosis for patients
with the condition. Nevertheless, MFS continues to be associated
with significant morbidity, and selected subgroups are refractory
to therapy and continue to show early mortality. In a review of 54
patients diagnosed during infancy, 89% had serious cardiac pathology, and cardiac disease was progressive despite standard care (22%
died during childhood, 16% before age 1 year). In the classic form
of MFS, it is estimated that more than 90% of individuals will have
a cardiovascular event during their lifetime, placing both physical
and mental stresses on patients and their families. Awareness of
these issues and referral for support services can facilitate a positive
perspective toward the condition.

GENETIC COUNSELING

The heritable nature of MFS makes recurrence risk (genetic) counseling mandatory. Fathers of these sporadic cases are, on average,
7-10 years older than fathers in the general population. This paternal age effect suggests that these cases represent new dominant
pathogenic variants with minimal recurrence risk to additional
future offspring of the normal parents. Owing to rare reports of
gonadal mosaicism in a phenotypically normal parent, the recurrence risk for parents of a sporadic case can be reported as low but
not zero. Each child of an affected parent, however, has a 50% risk
of inheriting the MFS pathogenic variant and thus being affected.
Recurrence risk counseling is best accomplished by professionals
with expertise in the issues surrounding the disorder.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

4369

Chapter 744

Ehlers-­Danlos Syndrome
Donald Basel
Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a heterogeneous group of heritable connective tissue disorders that are grouped into three broad
pathoetiologic categories and more specifically divided into fourteen subtypes (Table 744.1). Affected individuals are considered to
have an overlapping phenotype of abnormally soft, extensible skin,
which often heals poorly, in association with joint hypermobility
and occasional instability believed to be rooted in a disruption of
normal collagen function (Tables 744.2 and 744.3). All organ systems contain connective tissue elements, and many of these elements are involved in supporting the function of feedback receptors
such as mechanoreceptors in lumen or vessel walls or stretch receptors in tendons. The myriad of symptoms, variability of expression,
modes of inheritance, and unique phenotypic elements distinguish
the subtypes from one another while establishing their common
origins. The hypermobility type (hEDS) is the most common form
and has no clear molecular etiology.
The connective tissue matrix is complex (Fig. 744.1), and the
interplay of cells, collagen and elastin fibers, proteins, and cell
signaling molecules remains poorly understood. However, dysfunction at both structural and functional levels more than likely
explains the complex medical associations typically encountered in
this population, with complaints ranging from joint instability and
tissue fragility to chronic pain, autonomic dysfunction, and chronic
fatigue (see Table 744.3).

CLASSIFICATION OF THE SIX MOST COMMON
SUBTYPES OF EHLERS-­DANLOS SYNDROME
Classic (Genes: COL5a1, COL5a2, COL1a1;
Previously EDS Type I—Gravis, EDS Type II—Mitis)

Classic EDS is the second most common form of EDS and is an autosomal dominant connective tissue disorder characterized by skin
hyperelasticity (Fig. 744.2), widened atrophic scars (skin fragility),
and joint hypermobility. Other features include easy bruising, which
is often associated with hemosiderin staining of the tissues (particularly over regions exposed to frequent trauma, like the shins). The
skin is “velvet” to the touch and is particularly fragile, with minor
lacerations forming gaping wounds that leave broad, atrophic, papyraceous (“cigarette paper”) scars (Fig. 744.3; see also Table 744.2).
Additional cutaneous manifestations include molluscoid pseudotumors over pressure points from accumulations of connective tissue
and piezogenic papules (Fig. 744.4). Joints are hypermobile, often
with joint instability (Fig. 744.5). Scoliosis frequently presents in
adolescence, and mitral valve prolapse is common. Life expectancy
is generally not reduced, although rare rupture of large arteries has
been reported. Similar noncutaneous nonarticular comorbidities,
as seen in hypermobile EDS, are found, in particular pain and gastrointestinal dysfunction (see Table 744.3). Premature birth caused
by rupture of membranes of an affected offspring is not uncommon. The diagnosis is made by clinical findings and sequencing of
COL5A1 and COL5A2 genes.

Hypermobile (Cause Unknown, Previously EDS Type III)

Hypermobile EDS (hEDS) is the most prevalent form of EDS
with an estimated population frequency of between 0.75–3%. It
is an autosomal dominant disorder, but the causative molecular
pathoetiology remains elusive. Fewer than 3% of patients with a
hEDS phenotype are associated with heterozygous tenascin X gene
loss of function, and likewise, only a minority of cases are linked to
other findings, such as the association with mosaic type 1 collagen

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4370 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 744.1  Classification of Ehlers-­Danlos Syndrome
TYPE

GENE

Classic

COL5A1, COL5A2 (usually
haploinsufficiency)

SKIN FINDINGS

JOINT CHANGES

Hyperextensibility,
Hypermobility and
bruising, velvety skin,
its complications,
widened atrophic scars,
joint dislocations
molluscoid pseudotumors,
spheroids

COL1A1
Specific pathogenic
variant; c.934C>T

INHERITANCE

OTHER COMMENTS

AD

Mitral valve prolapse,
hernias

AD

Blue sclerae, short stature,
osteopenia/fractures; may
have late arterial rupture

AR

Severe cardiac valve issues
as adult

CLASSIC VARIANTS
Cardiac valvular

Biallelic loss of function
for COL1A2

Classic EDS features

Periodontal

C1R
C1S

Can have classic EDS
features

Can have
hypermobility

AD

Periodontitis, marfanoid
habitus, prominent eyes,
short philtrum

Classic-­like

TNXB

Hyperextensibility, marked
hypermobility, severe
bruising, velvety skin, no
scarring tendency
Joint hypermobility,
extensible and redundant
skin, abnormal scarring

Hypermobility

AR

Hypermobility

AR

Parents (especially mothers)
with one TNXB pathogenic
variant; can have joint
hypermobility
Biallelic loss of function
variants. Highly variable.

AEBP1

Hypermobility

Unknown

Mild hyperextensibility,
scarring, textural change

Hypermobility,
chronic joint
pain, recurrent
dislocations

AD

Sometimes confused with
joint hypermobility
syndrome

Vascular

COL3A1
Rare variants in COL1A1

Thin, translucent skin,
bruising, early varicosities, acrogeria

Small joint
hypermobility

AD

Abnormal type III collagen
secretion; rupture of bowel,
uterus, arteries; typical
facies; pneumothorax

Kyphoscoliosis

PLOD (deficient lysyl
hydroxylase)
FKBP14

Soft, hyperextensible skin,
bruising, atrophic scars

Hypermobility

AR

Severe congenital muscle
hypotonia that improves a
little in childhood; congenital
kyphoscoliosis, scleral fragility
and rupture, marfanoid
habitus, osteopenia,
sensorineural hearing loss

AR

Spondyloepimetaphyseal
dysplasia; can have bone
fragility and severe progressive kyphoscoliosis without
congenital hypotonia;
moderate short stature,
loose facial skin, wrinkled
palms with thenar and
hypothenar atrophy, blue
sclerae, curly hair, alopecia

VARIANTS WITH KYPHOSCOLIOSIS
Spondylocheirodysplastic form

SLC39A13, which
encodes the ZIP13 zinc
transporter
B4GALT7 or B3GALT6,
encoding galactosyltransferase I or II,
key enzymes in GAG
synthesis

Similar to kyphoscoliotic
form

Brittle cornea
syndrome

ZNF469 or PRDM5

Skin hyperextensibility

Joint
hypermobility

AR

Kyphoscoliosis; characteristic thin, brittle cornea,
ocular fragility, blue sclera,
keratoconus

Musculocontractural

CHST14 (encoding
dermatan
4-­O-­sulfotransferase)
DSE (encoding dermatan
sulfate epimerase)

Fragile, hyperextensible
skin with atrophic scars
and delayed wound
healing

Hypermobility

AR

Progressive kyphoscoliosis;
adducted thumbs in infancy,
clubfoot, arachnodactyly,
contractures, characteristic
facial features, hemorrhagic
diathesis

Myopathic

COL12A1

Soft, hyperextensible

Hypermobile small
joints, large joint
contractures (hip,
knees, elbows)

AD or AR

Characterized by muscle
hypotonia and weakness

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 744 u Ehlers-­Danlos Syndrome

4371

Table 744.1  Classification of Ehlers-­Danlos Syndrome—cont’d
TYPE

GENE

SKIN FINDINGS

Arthrochalasis

Exon 6 deletion of
COL1A1 or COL1A2

Hyperextensible, soft skin
with or without abnormal
scarring

Dermatosparaxis

Type I collagen N-­
peptidase ADAMTS2

Severe fragility, sagging,
redundant skin

JOINT CHANGES

INHERITANCE

Marked
hypermobility
with recurrent
subluxations

AD

Congenital hip dislocation,
arthrochalasis, multiplex
congenita, short stature

OTHER COMMENTS

AR

Also occurs in cattle

AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; EDS, Ehlers–Danlos syndrome; GAG, glycosaminoglycan.
From Malfait F, Francomano C, Byers P, et al. The 2017 International Classification of the Ehlers–Danlos syndromes. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2017;175(1):8–26.

Table 744.2  Common and Uncommon Features of
Classic Ehlers-­Danlos Syndrome

Table 744.3  Associated Features in Ehlers-­Danlos/
Hypermobility Spectrum Disorders

SKIN
Hyperextensible
Velvety
Fragile, thin, poor tensile strength
Atopic scarring (“cigarette-­paper” scars)
Striae
Bruising and bleeding (hemosiderin staining of skin)
Piezogenic papules, subcutaneous sphenoids
Wound dehiscence/incisional hernia

AUTONOMIC AND NEUROLOGIC DYSFUNCTION
Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS)
Dizziness
Palpitations
Gastroparesis
Diarrhea
Constipation
Sleep dysfunction
Chronic fatigue
Headache (migraine, new daily headache)
Urinary stress incontinence
Somatosensory amplification
Irritable bowel syndrome
Neuropathic pain

MUSCULOSKELETAL/JOINTS
Hypermobile ± joint dislocations
Pes planus
Chronic musculoskeletal pain, sprains
Late walking, hypotonia
OTHER ORGAN INVOLVEMENT
Chiari type I malformation
Gastrointestinal (nausea, reflux, constipation)
Umbilical hernia
Hiatal hernia
Mitral valve prolapse
Aortic root dilation
CSF leak/headache
Pelvic organ prolapse
Premature rupture of fetal membranes
Cervical incompetence
Stress incontinence
Hyperkyphosis
Scoliosis
High arched palate
Femur anteversion (“W” sitting position)
Hollow organ rupture, diverticula
Occipitoatlantoaxial hypermobility

defects. There are currently no diagnostic biomarkers, and the
inter-­and intrafamilial variation has clouded the ability to clearly
define large study populations with sufficient phenotypic alignment. An editorial highlighted the impact of sex hormones and
associations of certain symptom complexes to environmental exposures or “trigger events,” which begs the question of a more complex
gene-­environment or epigenetic influence.
The primary clinical finding in hEDS is generalized joint hypermobility with less prominent skin manifestations. There is inconsistency in the literature as to what defines hypermobility, but
generally a score of ≥6 on the Beighton hypermobility scale (Fig.
744.6, Table 744.4) would qualify as hypermobility in prepubertal
children and adolescents, ≥5 for postpubertal individuals up to
the age of 50, and ≥4 for all adults beyond the age of 50. Children
<6 years of age generally tend toward a hypermobile state, and the
Beighton score may not be a reliable indicator of connective tissue
laxity in these children (Table 744.5). Joint instability with frequent

MUSCULOSKELETAL PAIN
Chronic regional pain syndrome
Fibromyalgia

dislocations is common but not universal; joints are predisposed to
osteoarthritis in adults.
Patients with hEDS have significant nonarticular comorbidities
associated with functional disorders. These present as complex pain,
dysautonomia, chronic fatigue, anxiety, and sleep dysfunction (see
Table 744.3). The complexity of hEDS most likely originates from the
fact that it is genetically heterogeneous and represents an overlapping
spectrum of disorders. Although joint hypermobility is the common
denominator, symptoms may range from isolated familial joint hypermobility to the extreme multisystem disorder, which significantly
impacts daily quality of life. Life expectancy is not reduced. Mild aortic root dilatation has been reported in up to 20% of affected adults.
However, this mild dilatation is nonprogressive and not associated with
aortic root dissection.

Vascular (vEDS) (Gene: COL3A1; Previously EDS
Type IV)

vEDS is an autosomal dominant disorder that shows the most pronounced dermal thinning of all types of EDS. Consequently, the
skin is translucent, and the underlying venous network is prominent, most notably over the chest region. The skin has minimal
hyperextensibility but has a “velvet” texture and is often described as
“doughy.” The joints show increased mobility, often with instability.
Congenital club foot and hip dislocation are frequently associated.
Tissue fragility and arterial rupture cause significant morbidity and
mortality. The majority of affected individuals experience a major
vascular event before 20 years of age. Premature birth, extensive
ecchymoses from trauma, a high incidence of bowel rupture (especially the colon), uterine rupture during pregnancy (∼5% risk), rupture of the great vessels (80% by 40 years of age), dissecting aortic
aneurysm, and stroke all contribute to the increased morbidity and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4372 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Loose connective tissue

Amorphous matrix

Collagen fibers
Fibroblast
Macrophage
Lymphocyte
Elastic fibers
Monocyte

Reticular
fibers

Mast cell
Capillary
Fat cells
Erythrocyte
Macrophage

Endothelial
cell
Eosinophil
Plasma cell

Pericyte

Fig.

744.1 Complex connective tissue macroenvironment illustrated by intermingled collagen and elastin fibers, nerves, mast cells, and
capillaries. Both structure and function can be
impacted by an abnormal connective tissue matrix. (Courtesy Netter Images, Image ID 13192.
https://netterimages.com/loose-­connective-­tissue-­
ovalle-­histology-­figure-31-­labeled-­ovalle-­histology-­
frank-­h-­netter-13192.html)

Fig. 744.2 Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome (EDS). Skin hyperextensibility on
the arm. (From Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric
Dermatology, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2016: Fig. 6.1, p. 121.)

Fig. 744.4 Piezogenic papules on the medial aspects of the heels in
a 41-­yr-­old patient with Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome (top) and his 2-­yr-­old
daughter (bottom). (From Poppe H, Hamm H. Piezogenic papules in
Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome. J Pediatr. 2013;63:1788.)

Fig. 744.3 Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome (EDS). The Gorlin sign is 5 times
more common in EDS than in normal individuals. Note the scars on the
forehead. (From Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric
Dermatology, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2016: Fig. 6.2, p. 121.)

shortened life span associated with this condition. The median age
of death is estimated at 50 years. Patients are generally counseled
regarding the risks associated with pregnancy and advised to avoid
activities that raise intracranial or intrathoracic pressure as a result
of a Valsalva maneuver (such as weight training or trumpet playing). Skin protection in childhood is important to minimize trauma
(shin guards). Celiprolol, a β1 antagonist and a β2 agonist (vasodilator), may reduce vascular events but is not approved by the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in the United
States. The diagnosis is clinical and confirmed by gene sequencing
of COL3A1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 744 u Ehlers-­Danlos Syndrome
Kyphoscoliosis (Gene: PLOD [Lysyl Hydroxylase
Deficiency]; Previously EDS Type VI)

The kyphoscoliotic form of EDS is distinguished by the severe
kyphoscoliosis that develops early in childhood. It is an autosomal recessive disorder with phenotypic overlap with the classical
type of EDS in that the skin is soft and fragile, joints are hyperextensible, and easy bruising is notable from a young age. Unique

4373

characteristics include marked hypotonia and keratoconus, with
corneal fragility and globe rupture also reported. In addition, there
is a higher risk for rupture of medium-­sized arteries. The severity of
the kyphoscoliosis may lead to restrictive lung disease with secondary pulmonary hypertension and reduced life expectancy. The diagnosis is clinical and confirmed by urine screening for an increased
ratio of deoxypyridinoline to pyridinoline cross linking as well as
gene sequencing of PLOD.

Arthrochalasia (Gene: COL1a1, COL1a2; Previously
EDS Types VIIA and B)

This type of EDS is inherited as an autosomal dominant disorder and
characterized by severe joint instability in infancy. Joints show marked
hyperextensibility with painless dislocation; the skin bruises easily and
is soft and hyperextensible. Congenital hypotonia with gross motor
delay is common, and kyphoscoliosis can develop in childhood. The
diagnosis is clinical and confirmed by gene sequencing of COL1A1 and
COL1A2.

Dermatosparaxis (Type 1 Collagen N-­Peptidase;
Previously EDS Type VIIC)

Fig. 744.5 Despite joint hyperextensibility, this patient does not meet
Beighton score criteria for the extreme hypermobility seen with hypermobile Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome.

1. Passive dorsiflexion of the fifth metacarpophalangeal joint. Score is positive if  90°

2. Passive hyperextension of the elbow.
Score is positive if  10°

This type of EDS is a rare autosomal recessive condition characterized by redundant skin that is soft, fragile, and bruises easily.
Affected children often have a characteristic facial appearance,
with skin sagging into jowls and fullness around the eyes (“puffy”).
Premature rupture of membranes is common; closure of fontanels is delayed. Additional unique features reported in this group
include short limbs with brachydactyly (short fingers), frequent

4. Passive apposition of the thumb to the flexor side of the forearm, while shoulder is 90° flexed,
elbow extended and hand pronated. Score is positive if the whole thumb touches the flexor side of
the forearm.

Score: Positive

Score: Negative

5. Forward flexion of the trunk, with the knees straight. Score is positive if the
hand palms rest easily on the floor.

3. Passive hyperextension of the knee.
Score is positive if  10°

*Males positive if  180° for measure 2. and 3. Score: Positive

Score: Negative

Fig. 744.6 Beighton score. The range of motion of several key small and large joints is measured to provide an overview of joint hypermobility.

Instability is not assessed. Scoring: 2 points for each bilateral measure in Nos. 1 to 4 and 1 point for No. 5, equaling a total possible score of 9.
Hypermobility is considered significant with a score of ≥6 between the ages of 6 and 35. (Modified from Smits-­Engelsman B, Klerks M, Kirby A.
Beighton Score: a valid measure for generalized hypermobility in children. J Pediatr 2011;158:119–123.e4.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4374 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 744.4  The Nine-­Point Beighton Hypermobility
Score

Table 744.6  Genetic / Mendelian Conditions Presenting
with Joint Hypermobility

THE ABILITY TO:

RIGHT

LEFT

1. Passively dorsiflex the fifth
metacarpophalangeal joint to ≥90 degrees

1

1

2.	Oppose the thenar aspect of the thumb to
the volar aspect of the ipsilateral forearm

1

1

3.	Hyperextend the elbow to ≥10 degrees

1

1

HEREDITARY (SOFT/NONOSSIFIED) CONNECTIVE TISSUE
DISORDERS
Ehlers-­Danlos syndromes and related disorders
Fibrillinopathies (Marfan and Beals syndromes) and other disorders
of the transforming growth factor-­b pathway (e.g., Loeys-­Dietz
syndrome, Shprintzen-­Goldberg syndrome)
Hereditary cutis laxae

4.	Hyperextend the knee to ≥10 degrees

1

1

5.	Place hands flat on the floor without bending
the knees

1
Total: 9

One point may be gained for each side for maneuvers 1-4, so the hypermobility score
will have a maximum of 9 points if all are positive.
From Hakim A, Grahame R. Joint hypermobility. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol.
2003;17:989–1004, Table 1.

Table 744.5  A Five-­Part Questionnaire for Identifying
Hypermobility
1.	Can you now (or could you ever) place your hands flat on the floor
without bending your knees?
2.	Can you now (or could you ever) bend your thumb to touch your
forearm?
3.	As a child did you amuse your friends by contorting your body
into strange shapes or could you do the splits?
4.	As a child or teenager did your shoulder or kneecap dislocate on
more than one occasion?
5.	Do you consider yourself double-­jointed?
Answers in the affirmative to two or more questions suggest
hypermobility with sensitivity 80–85% and specificity 80–90%.

SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS
Achondroplasia and hypochondroplasia
Dysplasias with multiple dislocations (e.g., Larsen and Desboquis
syndromes, CST3-­related and gPAPP-­related disorders)
Some spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasias
Some COL2A1-­related and COL11-­related disorders
Diastrophic dysplasia
Trichorhinophalangeal dysplasia
HEREDITARY MYOPATHIES
COL6-­related disorders
SEPN1-­related and RYR1-­related disorders
MYH7-­related and TTN-­related disorders
Limb girdle muscular dystrophy 2E with joint hypermobility and
contractures
CHROMOSOMAL AND GENOMIC DISORDERS
Trisomy 21
47,XXY and 47,XXX
Some microdeletion and microduplication syndromes
MULTIPLE CONGENITAL ANOMALIES/INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY
DISORDERS (SELECTED)
RASopathies
Kabuki syndrome
FG syndrome
Fragile X syndrome
From Castori M, Hakim A. Contemporary approach to joint hypermobility and related
disorders. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2017;29:640–649. Table 3.

From Hakim A, Grahame R. Joint hypermobility. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol.
2003;17:989–1004. Table 3.

hernias (umbilical, inguinal), blue sclerae, and bladder rupture.
Joints are hypermobile. The diagnosis is confirmed by sequencing
of ADAMTS2.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

EDS represents a portion of the hereditary connective tissue disorders, many of which have unique features that enable clinical
differentiation. The primary differential diagnosis would include
Loeys-­Dietz syndrome, which has features of both vEDS and Marfan syndrome (see Chapter 743). EDS has also been confused with
MASS syndrome (mitral valve prolapse, aortic root dilation, skeletal
changes, skin changes), cutis laxa (see Chapter 745), and pseudoxanthoma elasticum. In general, the skin of patients with cutis laxa
hangs in redundant folds, whereas the skin of those with EDS is
hyperextensible and snaps back into place when stretched. Other
disorders that impact the integrity of the connective tissues—such
as exposure to corticosteroids and osteogenesis imperfecta or mild
myopathic disorders (Bethlem myopathy, Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy)—can be indistinguishable in the early stages of
disease (Table 744.6).

GENERAL APPROACH TO MANAGEMENT

In addition to the EDS type-­specific therapies discussed under each
disease, there are general approaches to help improve symptoms and
avoid complications.

Musculoskeletal pain, which initially involves the joints, eventually may become generalized and requires a combination of physical
therapy and nonpharmacologic approaches (Fig. 744.7). Physical
therapy should focus on enhancing the strength of the muscles supporting the affected joints. With severe recurrent sprains or dislocations, bracing may be necessary. Pain medication for low-­to
moderate-­intensity pain could include nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (however, their platelet-­inhibiting action may increase
the risk of cutaneous bleeding). Higher-­intensity pain may require
other agents, such as selective serotonin receptor inhibitors or low-­
dose tricyclic antidepressants. Muscle relaxants or antiepileptic
agents should be avoided because they may increase fatigue. Surgery for joint dislocations should be avoided if possible as should
prolonged periods of inactivity (which result in rapid muscle deconditioning) (Table 744.7). If surgery is needed for any complication,
the sutures should approximate the margins, suture tension should
be avoided, and the sutures should be retained longer than usual.
Other approaches to pain include cognitive behavioral therapy, acupuncture, and transepidermal electrical nerve stimulation (TENS).
Chronic fatigue should be approached by supporting good sleep
hygiene and avoiding sedating medications (see Table 744.7). Patients
at risk for arterial bowel or uterine rupture should be counseled about
preventive measures, appropriate medications (see specific subtype),
and early warning signs of organ rupture.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 745 u Cutis Laxa 4375

Young age
Joint hypermobility
Multiple trauma
Dislocations
Growing pain
Predominantly nociceptive pain

Widespread musculoskeletal pain
arthralgias/myalgias
Enthesopathies: Tenditis,
tenosynovitis, fasciitis
Non-articular pain: Gastrointestinal,
pelvic, or headache

Neuropathic pain: Nerve
entrapment syndromes
Peripheral paresthesias and signs
similar to complex regional pain
syndromes
Signs of central sensitization:
hyperalgesia, allodynia,
hypersensitivity

Pain with severe fatigue
Visceral complications of EDS
Cardiac and autonomic
disturbances

Fig. 744.7 Characteristics of pain in Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome that progress in clinical stages. (From Zhou Z, Rewari A, Shanthanna H. Management
of chronic pain in Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome. Medicine. 2018;97:e13115.)

Table 744.7  Lifestyle Recommendations for Hypermobile
Ehlers-­Danlos Syndrome
Promote regular aerobic fitness
Promote fitness support with strengthening, gentle stretching, and
proprioception exercise
Promote postural and ergonomic hygiene, especially during sleep,
at school, and in the workplace
Promote weight control (body mass index [BMI] <25)
Promote daily relaxation activities
Promote lubrication during sexual intercourse
Promote early treatment of malocclusion
Avoid high-­impact sports/activities
Avoid low environmental temperatures
Avoid prolonged sitting positions and prolonged recumbency
Avoid sudden head-­up postural change
Avoid excessive weightlifting/carrying
Avoid large meals (especially of refined carbohydrates)
Avoid hard foods intake and excessive jaw movements (e.g., ice,
gums)
Avoid bladder irritant foods (e.g., coffee and citrus products)
Avoid nicotine and alcohol intake
Note: these recommendations are intended as flexible indications for ameliorating
quality of life and do not represent lifesaving solutions.
Adapted from Castori M, Morlino S, Celletti C, et al. Management of pain and fatigue
in the joint hypermobility syndrome (aka Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome, hypermobility
type): principles and proposal for a multidisciplinary approach. Am J Med Genet.
2012;158:2055–2070.

Chapter 745

Cutis Laxa
Leah Lalor
Cutis laxa syndromes encompass a group of rare multisystem disorders
that include loose redundant skinfolds as hallmark clinical feature (Fig.
745.1). Cutis laxa results from impaired elastic fiber assembly and homeostasis, and the known underlying gene defects affect different extracellular
matrix proteins, intracellular trafficking, or cellular metabolism.
Cutis laxa (CL) may present in autosomal recessive (ARCL1A,
ARCL1B, ARCL1C, ARCL2A, ARCL2B), autosomal dominant (ADCL),

Fig. 745.1 Pendulous folds of skin of an infant with cutis laxa.

X-­linked or acquired forms (Fig. 745.2, Tables 745.1 and 745.2). Acquired
CL may develop after a febrile illness, inflammatory skin diseases such
as lupus erythematosus or erythema multiforme, amyloidosis, urticaria,
angioedema, hypersensitivity reactions to penicillin, or in neonates born
to women who were taking penicillamine.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

CL may demonstrate widespread folds of loose skin, or changes may
be mild and limited in extent, resembling anetoderma. Patients with
severe cutis laxa have characteristic facial features; they present with
an aged appearance with sagging jowls (“bloodhound” appearance;
see Fig. 745.1), a hooked nose with everted nostrils, a short columella, a long upper lip, and everted lower eyelids. The skin is also
lax elsewhere on the body and has been described as resembling an
ill-­fitting suit. Hyperelasticity and hypermobility of the joints as seen
in the Ehlers-­Danlos syndromes are not present. Many infants have
a hoarse cry, probably as a result of laxity of the vocal cords. Tensile
strength of the skin is normal. Other features are noted in Table 745.3.
The autosomal dominant form of CL (ADCL) is typically caused by
pathogenic variants in ELN, which encodes elastin, an essential extracellular matrix protein responsible for maintenance of skin elasticity.
ADCL has predominant skin involvement but can have risk for aortic
aneurysm and emphysema. It typically manifests in infancy; it may be
associated with intrauterine growth restriction, ligamentous laxity, and
delayed closure of the fontanels.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4376 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Cutis laxa syndromes
ARCL
ADCL

X-linked CL
ARCL type 1

ARCL type 2

Related
disorders

ARCL type 3
ATS

Predominant skin
involvement
Risk for aortic
aneurysm and
emphysema

Progeroid
Cataract
Athetoid
movements
Corpus callosum
agenesis

Emphysema
Genitourinary/
gastrointestinal
diverticula

Arterial tortuosity
Aneurysms

Glycosylation
defects
“Cobblestone”-like
cortical brain
malformations

Aortic root
dilatation
Cardiomyopathy
Pneumothorax

Progeroid
Cataract
Athetoid
movements
Corpus callosum
agenesis

Occipital horns
Genitourinary
diverticula

SLC2A10
GO
SCYL1BP1

ELN

ARCL type
1a/c

ARCL type 1b

ARCL type 2a/b

ARCL type 2c/d

ARCL type 3a/b

FBLN5
LTBP4

FBLN4

ATP6V0A2
PYCR1

ATP6V1E1
ATP6V1A

PYCR1
ALDH18A1

ALDH18A1

MACS
ATP7A

RIN2

Fig. 745.2 The spectrum of cutis laxa disorders. ADCL, Autosomal dominant cutis laxa; ARCL, autosomal recessive cutis laxa; ATS, arterial tortu-

osity syndrome; GO, geroderma osteodysplasticum; MACS, macrocephaly-­alopecia-­cutis laxa-­scoliosis. (From Beyens A, Boel A, Symoens S, et al.
Cutis laxa: a comprehensive overview of clinical characteristics and pathophysiology. Clin Genet. 2021;99:53–66. Fig.1.)

Table 745.1  Disorders to Consider in the Differential Diagnosis of Cutis Laxa
CLINICAL FINDINGS
DISEASE NAME

GENE SYMBOL

MIM #

INHERITANCE

CUTIS LAXA

EMPHYSEMA ANEURYSMS

DEVELOP­MENTAL
DELAY

ALDH18A1-­related
cutis laxa

ALDH18A1

612652

AR

+

−

−

++

FBLN5 -­related cutis
laxa

FBLN5

219100

AR

+++

+++

−

−

EFEMP2 -­related cutis
laxa

EFEMP2 (FBLN4)

219100

AR

++

++

+++

−

Autosomal recessive
cutis laxa type 2A

ATP6V0A2

278250
219200

AR

++

−

−

++

Autosomal dominant
cutis laxa

ELN or FBLN5

123700

AD

+

+

+

−

Gerodermia
osteodysplastica

GORAB

231070

AR

++

−

−

−

De Barsy syndrome
(PYCR1 -­related
progeroid syndrome)

PYCR1

219150

AR

+

−

−

+++

Autosomal recessive
cutis laxa type 2B

PYCR1

612940

AR

+

−

_

+++

LTBP4 -­related cutis laxa

LTBP4

613177

AR

+

++

+

+

RIN2 -­related cutis laxa

RIN2

613075

AR

+

−

−

±

Reproduced with permission from Van Maldergem L, Dobyns W, Kornak U. ATP6V0A2-­Related Cutis Laxa. 2009 Mar 19 [Updated 2011 May 10]. In: Pagon RA, Bird TD, Dolan CR,
et al., eds. GeneReviews[Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993. Available from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK5200/

Pathogenic variants in ALDH18A1, which encodes delta-1-­
pyrroline-5-­
carboxylate synthetase (P5CS), a key enzyme in the
synthesis of proline (an abundant amino acid in elastin), can cause
autosomal dominant or recessive CL. Notably, pathogenic variants in PYCR1, which encodes pyrroline-­carboxylate reductase 1,
another enzyme in this pathway, cause recessive CL (ARCL3). Each
of these proline synthesis-­related CL subtypes can also present with

progeroid features, cataracts, athetoid movements, and corpus callosum anomalies.
Autosomal recessive CL is divided into three general subtypes: type
1 (ARCL1), with cardiopulmonary complications, type 2 (ARCL2), with
CNS and skeletal anomalies, and type 3 (ARCL3; de Barsy syndrome),
which adds ocular findings to the type 2 features. Overall, these individuals can present with multiple hernias, rectal prolapse, diaphragmatic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 746 u Bone Structure, Growth, and Hormonal Regulation 4377
Table 745.2  Associations with Acquired Cutis Laxa
Infections
Toxocara canis (cat-­scratch)
Treponema pallidum (syphilis)
Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease)
Onchocerca volvulus (onchocerciasis)
Medications
Isoniazid
Penicillins
D-­penicillamine
Inflammatory diseases
Celiac disease
Sarcoidosis
Dermatitis herpetiformis
Sweet syndrome
Rheumatic disorders
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Rheumatoid arthritis
Others
α1-­antitrypsin deficiency
Mastocytosis
Nephrotic syndrome
Amyloidosis
Malignancy
From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2022: Box 6.6, p. 151.

Table 745.3  Most Common Other Features of Cutis Laxa
• Facial dysmorphism
• Aortic dilatation
• Pulmonary artery stenosis
• Pulmonary emphysema
• Diverticulae: gastrointestinal, genitourinary
• Uterine or rectal prolapse
• Ventral, hiatal, inguinal hernias
Modified from Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2022: Box 6.4, p. 148.

atony, diverticula of the gastrointestinal and genitourinary tracts, cor
pulmonale, emphysema, pneumothoraces, peripheral pulmonary
artery stenosis, and aortic dilation. Characteristic facial features include
downward-­slanting palpebral fissures, a broad, flat nose, and large ears.
Skeletal anomalies, dental caries, growth retardation, and developmental
delay also occur. Such patients often have a shortened life span.
ARCL1 is comprised of three subtypes. Subtypes ARCL1a and
ARCL1c (Urban-­Rifkin-­Davis syndrome), caused by dominant pathogenic variants in FBLN5 and LTPB4, respectively, are similar disorders
and, in addition to skin findings, more frequently develop emphysematous lung changes and mechanical insufficiency of the gastrointestinal
and genitourinary tract wall. Subtype ARCL1b, caused by pathogenic
variants in FBLN4, in addition to skin findings, typically develops
elongation, tortuosity, and aneurysms of the large-­and middle-­sized
arteries.
ARCL2 often presents with delays in neuromotor development and can
include epilepsy and cortical or cerebellar malformations. Recessive pathogenic variants in ATP6V0A2 (ARCL 2a) are more common and include
N-­or O-­glycosylation defects and pathogenic variants PYCR1 (ARCL2b).
ARCL2 with recessive pathogenic variants in ATP6V1E1 (ARCL2c)
and ATP6V1A (ARCL2d), genes encoding key enzymes in acidification of intracellular organelles, can include N-­or O-­glycosylation
defects and demonstrate increased frequency of aortic root dilatation,
cardiomyopathy, and pneumothorax.
X-­linked CL, also referred to as occipital horn syndrome, is caused
by pathogenic variants of ATP7A that encodes a Cu2+-­transporting
adenosine triphosphatase, α-­polypeptide. This clinical presentation is
allelic with Menkes disease (see Chapter 639.5) but is at the milder end
of that spectrum.

Cutis laxa–like skin changes may also be seen in association with
multiple other syndromes, including Lenz-­
Majewski syndrome,
hyperostotic dwarfism, SCARF (skeletal abnormalities, cutis laxa, craniostenosis, ambiguous genitalia, retardation, facial abnormalities)
syndrome, wrinkling skin syndrome, arterial tortuosity syndrome
(ATS), gerodermia osteodysplasia, macrocephaly alopecia cutis laxa
scoliosis syndrome (MACS), and Costello syndrome.

HISTOLOGY

Histologically, elastic tissue is reduced throughout the dermis, with
fragmentation, distention, and clumping of the elastic fibers. This often
results in bare microfibrils of random directionality. The light microscopic
appearance of elastic fibers in CL patients is typically not able to discern
between different subtypes as they appear reduced and fragmented in all.

TREATMENT

Treatment of the skin findings in cutis laxa is largely supportive,
although textural improvement and symptomatic relief using resurfacing lasers for acquired CL has been reported.
Regarding medical management, as a general rule, unrelated to the
underlying subtype, elastic fiber defects warrant regular assessment of
pulmonary, cardiovascular, and urinary systems. Yearly echocardiography is recommended in dominant CL, ARCL1a/c, and ARCL2c.
More intensive echocardiographic follow-­up is needed in ARCL1b and
ATS (every 3 months in ARCL1b; every 3 months until the age of 5 in
ATS), while in the remaining subtypes an examination every 3-5 years
is sufficient. In ARCL1, MRI head-­to-­pelvis should be repeated yearly
(ARCL1b) or every 3-5 years (ARCL1a/c and ATS).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Section 5

Metabolic Bone Disease
Chapter 746

Bone Structure, Growth,
and Hormonal Regulation
Rebecca J. Gordon and
Catherine M. Gordon
See also Chapters 69 and 610.
Bone is a rigid organ but metabolically active in that it is constantly
being formed (modeled) and reformed (remodeled). It is capable of
rapid turnover, bearing weight, and withstanding the stresses of various physical activities. Bone is the major body reservoir for calcium,
phosphorus, and magnesium. Other functions of bone include organ
protection, structure, movement, and sound transmission. It is also an
endocrine organ that produces fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23),
which regulates renal phosphate handling. Disorders that affect this
organ and the process of mineralization are designated metabolic
bone diseases.
The human skeleton consists of a protein matrix, largely composed
of a collagen-­
containing protein, osteoid, on which is deposited a
crystalline mineral phase. Collagen-­
containing osteoid accounts for
90% of bone protein; other proteins, including osteocalcin, which

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4378 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
contains γ-­carboxyglutamic acid, are also present. Synthesis of osteocalcin depends on vitamin K and vitamin D; in states with high bone turnover, serum osteocalcin values are often elevated. Osteocalcin appears to
enhance insulin secretion and sensitivity and reduce fat stores.
The microfibrillar matrix of osteoid permits deposition of highly
organized calcium phosphate crystals, including hydroxyapatite
[Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2] and octacalcium phosphate [Ca8H2(PO4)6⋅5H2O],
plus less-­organized amorphous calcium phosphate, calcium carbonate,
sodium, magnesium, and citrate. Hydroxyapatite is deep within bone
matrix, whereas amorphous calcium phosphate coats the surface of newly
formed or remodeled bone.
Because bone growth and turnover rates are high during childhood,
many clinical and osseous features of metabolic bone diseases are more
prominent in children than in adults. The growth pattern of bones is an
acceleration of bone growth (length) of the limbs during prepubescence,
increased growth (length) of the trunk (spine) during early adolescence,
and increased bone mineral deposition in late adolescence.
The use of dual-­energy x-­ray absorptiometry (DXA) or quantitative
CT permits measurement of both mineral content and bone density in
healthy subjects and children with metabolic bone disease. DXA exposes
the patient to less radiation than a chest radiograph and significantly less
than quantitative CT and is therefore most commonly used in clinical
practice (see Chapter 749). Bone growth occurs in children by the process of calcification of the cartilage cells present at the ends of bone. In
accord with the prevailing extracellular fluid calcium and phosphate concentrations, mineral is deposited in chondrocytes or cartilage cells set to
undergo mineralization. The main function of the vitamin D–parathyroid
hormone (PTH)–FGF23–endocrine axis is to maintain the extracellular
fluid calcium and phosphate concentrations at appropriate levels to permit
mineralization.
Other hormones also appear to regulate the growth and mineralization of cartilage, including growth hormone acting through insulin-­
like growth factors, thyroid hormones, insulin, leptin, ghrelin, and
androgens and estrogens during the pubertal growth spurt. Supraphysiologic concentrations of glucocorticoids impair cartilage function and
bone growth and augment bone resorption.
Rates of bone formation are coordinated with alterations in mineral
metabolism in both the intestine and kidneys, where a number of hormones
regulate the processes. Inadequate dietary intake or intestinal absorption of
calcium causes a fall in serum levels of calcium and its ionized fraction. This
decrease serves as the signal for PTH synthesis and secretion, resulting in
greater bone resorption (which raises the serum calcium level) and enhanced
distal tubular reabsorption of calcium. It also promotes higher rates of renal
synthesis of 1,25-­dihydroxyvitamin D [1,25(OH)2D] or calcitriol, the most
active metabolite of vitamin D (Fig. 746.1). Calcium homeostasis is thus
controlled by the intestine because the availability of 1,25(OH)2D ultimately
determines the fraction of ingested calcium that is absorbed.
Phosphate homeostasis is regulated by the kidneys because intestinal
phosphate absorption is nearly complete, and renal excretion determines
the serum level of phosphate. Excessive intestinal phosphate absorption causes a fall in serum levels of ionized calcium and a rise in PTH
secretion, resulting in phosphaturia, thus lowering the serum phosphate
level and permitting the calcium level to rise. Hypophosphatemia blocks
PTH secretion and promotes renal 1,25(OH)2D synthesis. This latter
compound also promotes greater intestinal phosphate absorption. The
important role of FGF23 in phosphate homeostasis is described later.
Vitamin D can be synthesized in the skin under the influence of ultraviolet (UV) irradiation, or it can be absorbed from the diet. It is converted
to 25(OH)D3 (vitamin D3) in the liver and then further converted by the
kidney. The skin contains 7-­dehydrocholesterol, which is converted to
vitamin D3 [25(OH)D3] by UV radiation; other inactive vitamin D sterols are also produced (see Chapter 69). Vitamin D3 is then transported
in the bloodstream to the liver by a vitamin D–binding protein (DBP);
DBP binds all forms of vitamin D. The plasma concentration of free or
non­bound vitamin D is much lower than the level of DBP-­bound vitamin
D metabolites.
Vitamin D also can enter the metabolic pathway by ingestion of dietary
vitamin D2 (ergocalciferol) or vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol), the latter of
which is more potent, and both of which are absorbed from the intestine
because of the action of bile salts. After absorption, ingested vitamin D is

FGF23

()

()
UV

CYP27B

()

D3

25-D3

1, 25-D3

Diet

24, 25-D3

1, 24, 25-D3

()

CYP24

()

VDR

Transcription
of 200 proteins

Transcriptional
regulation
- Ca2 homeostasis
- cell proliferation
- cell differentiation
- immune function

Fig. 746.1 Vitamin D metabolism. Vitamin D can be synthesized in

the skin under the influence of ultraviolet (UV) irradiation, or it can be
absorbed from the diet. It is converted to 25(OH)D3 (vitamin D3) in the
liver and then further converted by the kidney. The enzyme cytochrome
P450 (CYP) 27B converts 25(OH)D3 to 1α,25-­(OH)2D3. 1,25(OH)2D3
binds to vitamin D receptor (VDR), which, after transport to the nucleus,
acts to induce the transcription of more than 200 proteins. The functions of some of the proteins are indicated. VDR activation leads to productions of fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23). FGF23 induces phosphaturia (not shown), upregulates CYP 24, and downregulates CYP 27B.

transported by chylomicrons to the liver, where, along with skin-­derived
vitamin D3, it is converted to 25-­hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D]. The
25(OH)D is next transported by DBP to the kidneys, where it undergoes
further metabolism. 25(OH)D is the main circulating vitamin D metabolite in humans (Table 746.1). Because the synthesis of 25(OH)D is weakly
regulated by feedback, its plasma level rises in summer and decreases during winter. High vitamin D intake raises the plasma level of 25(OH)D to
many times above normal, but the parent vitamin D compound itself is
absorbed by adipose tissue.
In the kidneys, 25(OH)D undergoes further hydroxylation, depending
on the prevailing serum concentration of calcium, phosphate, PTH, and
FGF23. If the calcium or phosphate level is reduced or the PTH level is elevated, the enzyme 25(OH)D-1-­hydroxylase is activated and 1,25(OH)2D is
formed. 1,25(OH)2D3 binds to a vitamin D receptor, which after transport
to the nucleus, acts to induce the transcription of 200-400 proteins and
peptides. The functions of some of the proteins are known.
Another class of proteins important in the regulation of mineral balance and vitamin D synthesis are the phosphatonins. Among these are
FGF23, sFRP-4 (secreted Frizzled-­related protein 4), and MEPE (matrix
extracellular phosphoglycoprotein). Overexpression of FGF23 results in
hypophosphatemia, phosphaturia, reduced serum 1,25(OH)2D values,
and some forms of rickets. Disorders of phosphate balance, including
hyper-­and hypophosphatemia, can relate to loss or gain of function of
these phosphatonins (see Fig. 746.1).
Vitamin D receptor activation by 1,25(OH)2D leads to production of
FGF23. FGF23 is produced by osteocytes and targets another organ, the
kidney, to promote phosphaturia. FGF23 reduces expression/insertion of
two sodium phosphate transporters into the renal proximal tubule, resulting in higher levels of urinary phosphate excretion. This bone-­derived hormone also inhibits renal hydroxylase activity (CYP 27B1) and promotes
24-­hydroxylase activity, with resultant decrease in 1,25(OH)2D levels.
The active metabolite, 1,25(OH)2D, circulates at a level that is only
0.1% of the level of 25(OH)D (see Table 746.1) and acts on the intestine to
increase the active transport of calcium and stimulate phosphate absorption. Because 1α-­hydroxylase is a mitochondrial enzyme that is tightly
feedback regulated, the synthesis of 1,25(OH)2D declines after serum
calcium or phosphate values return to normal. Excessive 1,25(OH)2D
is converted to an inactive metabolite. In the presence of normal or elevated serum calcium or phosphate concentrations, the renal 25(OH)
D-24-­
hydroxylase is activated, producing 24,25-­
dihydroxyvitamin D
[24,25(OH)2D], which is a pathway for the removal of excess vitamin D;
serum levels of 24,25(OH)2D (1-5 ng/mL) increase after ingestion of large
amounts of vitamin D (see Fig. 746.1) or in the presence of increased concentrations of FGF23. Although hypervitaminosis D and production of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 746 u Bone Structure, Growth, and Hormonal Regulation 4379
Table 746.1  Vitamin D Metabolic Values in Plasma of
Normal Healthy Subjects
METABOLITE

PLASMA VALUE

Vitamin D2

1-2 ng/mL

Vitamin D3

1-2 ng/mL

25(OH)D2

4-10 ng/mL

25(OH)D3

26-70 ng/mL

TOTAL 25(OH)D

20-80 ng/mL*

24,25(OH)2D

1-4 ng/mL

1,25(OH)2D
Infancy

70-100 pg/mL

Childhood

30-50 pg/mL

Adolescence

40-80 pg/mL

Adulthood

20-35 pg/mL

*The Institute of Medicine states that a value of 25(OH)D of 20 ng/mL is the lower limit
of normal for the general population. In contrast, the Endocrine Society defines
vitamin D deficiency as having a serum level of less than 20 ng/mL, and insufficiency
as a serum level between 21-29 ng/mL.

inactive metabolites can occur after oral dosing, extensive skin exposure
to sunlight does not usually produce toxic levels of 25(OH)D3, suggesting
natural regulation of the production of this metabolite in cutaneous tissue.
Serum 1,25(OH)2D levels are higher in children than in adults, are
not as subject to seasonal variability, and peak during the first year of
life and again during the adolescent growth spurt. These values must be
interpreted in light of the prevailing serum calcium, phosphate, and PTH
values, and with regard to the entire vitamin D metabolite profile.
Mineral deficiency prevents the normal process of bone mineral
deposition. If mineral deficiency occurs at the growth plate, growth
slows and bone age is retarded, a condition called rickets. Poor mineralization of trabecular bone resulting in a greater proportion of unmineralized osteoid is the condition of osteomalacia. Rickets is found only
in growing children before fusion of the epiphyses, whereas osteomalacia is present at all ages. All patients with rickets have osteomalacia,
but not all patients with osteomalacia have rickets. These conditions
should not be confused with osteoporosis, a condition of equal loss of
bone volume and mineral (see Chapter 749).
Rickets may be classified as calcium-­deficient or phosphate-­deficient
rickets. Because both calcium and phosphate ions constitute bone mineral, the insufficiency of either type in the extracellular fluid that bathes
the mineralizing surface of bone results in rickets and osteomalacia.
The two types of rickets are distinguishable by their clinical manifestations (Table 746.2). Rickets can also occur in the face of mineral

Table 746.2  Clinical Variants of Rickets and Related Conditions
SERUM
CALCIUM
LEVEL

ALKALINE
PHOSPHATASE
ACTIVITY

URINE
CONCENTRATION
OF AMINO ACIDS

GENETICS

GENE
DEFECT
KNOWN

CALCIUM DEFICIENCY WITH SECONDARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISM*
Lack of Vitamin D
Lack of exposure to sunlight
N or L
L

E

E

Dietary deficiency of vitamin D

N or L

L

E

E

Congenital

N or L

L

E

E

Other Deficiencies
Malabsorption of vitamin D

N or L

L

E

E

Liver diseases

N or L

L

E

E

Anticonvulsant drug

N or L

L

E

E

Renal osteodystrophy

N or L

E

E

V

L

N or L

E

PRIMARY PHOSPHATE DEFICIENCY (NO SECONDARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISM)
Genetic primary hypophosphatemia
N
L
E

E

AR

Y

N

XL, AD, AR

Y

X-­linked hypophosphatemic rickets

XL

Y

Autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic
rickets

AD

Y

Autosomal recessive hypophosphatemic
rickets

AR

Y

TYPE

Vitamin D–dependent type I

SERUM
PHOSPHORUS
LEVEL

Fanconi Syndrome
Cystinosis

N

L

E

E

AR

Y

Tyrosinosis

N

L

E

E

AR

Y

Lowe syndrome

N

L

E

E

XL

Y

Acquired

N

L

E

E

Phosphate Deficiency or Malabsorption
Parenteral hyperalimentation

N

L

E

N

Low phosphate intake

N

L

E

N
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4380 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 746.2  Clinical Variants of Rickets and Related Conditions—cont’d
SERUM
CALCIUM
LEVEL

SERUM
PHOSPHORUS
LEVEL

ALKALINE
PHOSPHATASE
ACTIVITY

URINE
CONCENTRATION
OF AMINO ACIDS

Renal tubular acidosis, type II proximal

N

L

E

N

Y

Tumor-­induced osteomalacia

N

L

E

N

Y

END-­ORGAN RESISTANCE TO 1,25(OH)2D3
Vitamin D-­dependent type II (several
variants)

L

L or N

E

E

AR

Y

RELATED CONDITIONS RESEMBLING RICKETS
Hypophosphatasia
N

N

L

Phosphoethanolamine elevated

AR

Y

Metaphyseal Dysostosis
Jansen type

E

N

E

N

AD

Y

Schmid type

N

N

E

N

AD

Y

TYPE

GENETICS

GENE
DEFECT
KNOWN

Other

*Deficiency of vitamin D; low 25(OH)D and no stimulation of higher 1,25(OH)2D values.
AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; E, elevated; L, low; N, normal; V, variable; XL, X-­linked; Y, yes.

deficiency, despite adequate vitamin D stores. True dietary calcium
deficiency rickets are found in some parts of Africa but rarely in North
America or Europe. A form of phosphate-­deficiency rickets can occur
in infants, given prolonged administration of phosphate-­sequestering
aluminum salts as a treatment for colic or gastroesophageal reflux. This
results in the phosphate depletion syndrome.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 747

Hypophosphatasia
Nourah N. Almutlaq and Linda A. DiMeglio
Hypophosphatasia (HPP) is a rare inborn error of metabolism in
which tissue-­nonspecific (liver, bone, kidney) alkaline phosphatase
isoenzyme (TNSALP) activity is deficient, although activity of the
intestinal and placental isoenzymes is normal. Decreased serum
alkaline phosphatase (ALP) concentrations are the hallmark of HPP.
Pathogenic variants in the ALPL gene reduce the TNSALP enzyme
activity to below the level essential for normal bone and teeth mineralization. More than 340 variants have been identified to date.
Missense variants are the most common; however, splice-­site, small
deletions, and frameshift variants also have been found. The high
heterogeneity of the disease is related to the inheritance pattern and
different missense variants’ varied TNSALP activity effects. Although
the genotype/phenotype correlation is not very consistent, the more
severe forms are recessively inherited and milder disease is dominantly inherited.
The clinical spectrum of HPP ranges from a very severe, typically lethal, perinatal form to a mild form with late-­adult onset
presenting with nonpathognomonic symptoms such as arthropathy and musculoskeletal pain. A nosology describing seven forms
of the condition, ranging from neonatal lethal disease to odontohypophosphatasia, which only affects teeth with no skeletal deformities, is employed. (Subtypes and features of HPP are shown in
Table 747.1.) The most common signs across subtypes are bone

demineralization and premature loss of teeth with intact roots in
the setting of low ALP.
The most severe perinatal HPP cases are lethal in utero or
shortly after birth in untreated newborns. Infants have profound
skeletal hypomineralization with short bones that lead to chest
deformities and subsequent hypoplastic lungs. Infants may also
have anemia with intracranial hemorrhage, periodic apnea, and
pyridoxine-­dependent seizures (Fig. 747.1A). Infantile HPP is next
on the continuum. These infants present before 6 months of age
with overlapping symptoms to perinatal HPP, including respiratory
distress from severe lung hypoplasia. They can also have irritability and failure to thrive explained by the hypercalcemia/hypercalciuria (leading to nephrocalcinosis) and premature craniosynostosis
(can lead to increased intracranial pressure). X-­rays reveal irregular
ossification, punched-­out areas, and metaphyseal cupping. Before
the availability of enzyme replacement therapy with asfotase alfa,
mortality was estimated at 50% and survivors had significant disability. This subset of patients can also improve spontaneously as
affected children mature, although early death from renal failure or
flail chest leading to pneumonia can occur.
Of note, a benign prenatal form of hypophosphatasia also exists. It
is seen in newborns with low ALP and skeletal abnormalities in utero
or at birth that improve spontaneously over time.
The next category of hypophosphatasia manifests in childhood (after
6 months of life) or late adolescence (hypophosphatasia tarda) (see Fig.
747.1B). These children present with premature exfoliation of primary
teeth (with the root intact because of poorly mineralized dental cementum), mild skeletal deformities, fracture, and variable short stature. Some
children have symptoms of skeletal pain and muscle weakness. Long
bones can have characteristic “tongues” of radiolucency (Fig. 747.2).
An adult hypophosphatasia form manifests in middle age (although
some patients recount a history of early deciduous tooth loss or rickets). It is characterized by nonspecific symptoms and a milder course
than pediatric forms. This form may be diagnosed after affected individuals present with osteopenia/osteoporosis, recurrent metaphyseal
stress fractures (particularly of the metatarsals and tibiae), and femoral
pseudofractures. Affected individuals can also have psychiatric symptoms (depression/anxiety) chondrocalcinosis, osteoarthritis, myopathy,
nephrocalcinosis, and permanent tooth loss between 40-60 years of age.
Rarely, patients presenting with identical clinical and radiographic
patterns have normal serum alkaline phosphatase activity but increased
concentrations of phosphoethanolamine, inorganic phosphate, and
pyridoxal-5-­phosphate. Their disease has been labeled pseudohypophosphatasia and might represent the presence of a variant alkaline

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 747.1  Hypophosphatasia Main Subtypes and Features
SUBTYPE

ONSET

INHERITANCE

CLINICAL FEATURES

Perinatal severe

Perinatal

Recessive

• Lethal in all cases without enzyme replacement
• Prenatal US: absent skeletal mineralization, bowed/short long bones,
fractures, osteochondral spurs, and pretibial dimpling
• Death from respiratory distress from chest deformities and lung
hypoplasia
• Vitamin B6-­dependent seizures

Prenatal benign

Perinatal

Dominant and
recessive

• Skeletal deformity in utero without fractures (“bent not broken”)
• Improves spontaneously, benign course

Infantile

≤ 6 mo

Recessive

• Lethal in approximately 50% of cases without enzyme replacement
• Appear normal at birth
• Severe bone demineralization leads to rachitic chest deformities and
resultant pulmonary hypoplasia
• Hypercalcemic hypercalciuria (leads to nephrocalcinosis)
• Craniosynostosis

Childhood

6 mo-18 yr

Dominant and
recessive

• Premature loss of deciduous teeth with root intact in children <5 yr
• Rickets/fractures/skeletal deformities
• “Tongues” of radiolucency on x-­ray
• Chronic joint/bone pain
• Short stature

Adult

Adulthood

Dominant and
recessive

• Mild
• Osteoporosis
• Stress fractures, osteomalacia, and chondrocalcinosis

Odontohypophosphatasia

Childhood

Dominant and
recessive

• Mildest form of HPP
• No skeletal deformities; premature exfoliation of primary and/or
permanent teeth
• Severe dental caries

Osteopenia

Metaphyseal
fraying

Metadiaphyseal
sclerosis

A

Tongue of
radiolucency

A

B

Irregularity of
the provisional
zone of
calcification

Distal metaphyseal
demineralization

Fig. 747.1 A, Fetus with congenital lethal hypophosphatasia showing

thin wavy ribs, platyspondyly, missing cervical vertebrae, ossification,
and bent femurs. B, A 7-­yr-­old with hypophosphatasia tarda showing
osteopenia, bent tibias, and punched-­out metaphyseal lesions.

Transverse subphyseal
band of lucency
Apparent physeal
widening

phosphatase isoenzyme that catalyzes artificial substrates in an alkaline
environment (e.g., a test tube), but not in vivo with natural substrates.
Because of the heterogenous clinical manifestations of HPP, which often
mimics other skeletal disorders, delays and misdiagnosis are common. Clinical features and radiologic findings in the setting of low ALP for age or other
biomarkers of the disorder should raise suspicion. Initially the diagnosis
might be suspected in the presence of a low serum ALP (adjusted for age and
natal sex) and supported with an increased urinary phosphoethanolamine
PEA level or high vitamin B6 concentrations. However, other etiologies for
low ALP should be ruled out (Fig. 747.3 and Table 747.2).

B
Fig. 747.2 Skeletal features of untreated hypophosphatasia. Untreated,

the radiographic features of hypophosphatasia of the wrist (A) and knee (B)
in children include osteopenia, metaphyseal fraying, metaphyseal flaring,
metadiaphyseal sclerosis, characteristic “tongues” of radiolucency, irregularity of the provisional zone of calcification, distal metaphyseal demineralization, transverse subphyseal band of lucency, and apparent physeal widening. (From Whyte MP, Madson KL, Phillips D, et al. Asfotase alfa therapy
for children with hypophosphatasia. JCI Insight.2016;1:e85971, Fig. 2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4382 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
ALP activity below normal for age and sex

Blood sample contaminated with EDTA/citrate?

Yes

No

Indicated by generally low
levels of potassium, calcium
and magnesium

Severely or chronically ill or calorie deplete?
No
Symptoms of hypophosphatasia?
Respiratory failure
Vitamin B6 responsive seizures
Elevated serum calcium or phosphate
and/or nephrocalcinosis
Failure to thrive, short stature
Fractures and bone pain
Craniosynostosis (e.g. scaphocephalus)
Chest deformity
Delayed walking, waddling gait
Premature loss of teeth, late dentition
Hypophosphatasia unlikely,
carrier status possible
Repeat PLP & PEA analysis,
or further investigation of
symptoms

Odonto-hypophosphatasia
or carrier status likely
If no dental abnormalities,
further investigations incl.
genetic testing

No

Exclude other causes of low ALP
activity by measuring:
Zinc, Magnesium, Thyroid function,
Full blood count,
Renal and liver function,
Parathyroid hormone,
Vitamin B12, C & D,
Celiac antibodies
Serum ceruloplasmin
No abnormalities
detected

Yes
PLP & PEA normal

Hypophosphatasia likely
Confirm with Plasma PLP + Urinary PEA

Possibility of a mild form of
hypophosphatasia or carrier?

PLP ± PEA elevated

Radiographs not
suggestive of
hypophosphatasia

X-ray of Knee, Lateral + AP Skull
(± Skeletal survey)
Assess characteristic signs of
hypophosphatasia such as
low level of mineralization,
radiolucent projections from the
epiphyseal plate into the metaphysis,
craniosynostosis

Radiographs
suggestive of
hypophosphatasia

Diagnosis of
hypophosphatasia
Refer to Pediatric Bone
Specialist/Endocrinologist
Genetic testing

Fig. 747.3 Diagnostic algorithm for the investigation of children presenting with low ALP activity and/or symptoms of hypophosphatasia. For
patients with low ALP, other conditions such as nutritional deficiencies (protein/calorie, zinc, folic acid, magnesium, vitamins B6, B12, and C), vitamin D excess, hypothyroidism, hypoparathyroidism, celiac disease, recent significant blood transfusions, renal osteodystrophy, cardiac surgery and
cardiopulmonary bypass, posthepatic resection and transplantation, achondroplasia, and Wilson disease need to be excluded. AP, Anteroposterior;
PEA, phosphoethanolamine; PLP, pyridoxal-5’-­phosphate. (From Saraff V, Narayanan VK, Lawson AJ, et al. A diagnostic algorithm for children with
low alkaline phosphatase activities: lessons learned from laboratory screening for hypophosphatasia. J Pediatr. 2016;172:181–186. Fig. 3.)

Table 747.2  Causes of Hypophosphatasemia
Cardiac bypass surgery
Celiac disease
Clofibrate therapy
Cleidocranial dysplasia
Cushing syndrome
Hypophosphatasia
Hypothyroidism
Improperly collected blood
(oxalate, EDTA)
Inappropriate reference range
Massive transfusion

Milk-­Alkali syndrome
Multiple myeloma
Osteogenesis imperfecta, type II
Pernicious or profound anemia
Radioactive heavy metals
Starvation
Vitamin C deficiency
Vitamin D intoxication
Wilson’s disease
Zn++ or Mg++ deficiency

Some mild HPP forms require only symptomatic and supportive
treatment. The primary treatment for more severe HPP is enzyme
replacement therapy with recombinant human TNSALP (asfotase
alfa). This therapy decreases the mortality rate in prenatal HPP and
improves skeletal healing and mineral content, pulmonary status,
and overall physical activity in other symptomatic forms.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

EDTA, Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
From Whyte MP. Hypophosphatasia: an overview for 2017. Bone. 2017;102:15–25.
Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 749 u Osteoporosis 4383

Chapter 748

Hyperphosphatasia
Nourah N. Almutlaq and Linda A. DiMeglio
Hyperphosphatasia is a set of conditions characterized by hyperphosphatasemia (elevated serum alkaline phosphatase [ALP]). Increases
in alkaline phosphatase are most commonly because of hepatobiliary
disease or bone disorders characterized by high osteoblast activity,
including nutritional rickets. Distinguishing liver from bone etiologies
requires fractionating alkaline phosphatase isoenzymes or measuring
bone-­specific alkaline phosphatase as well as other laboratory assessments of liver function and bone turnover/vitamin D status. ALP activity varies by age and gender; therefore, specific reference ranges should
be employed. It is usually higher in pediatric populations than adults,
peaking at times of high bone formation including in the first 6 months
and during pubertal growth.
In children younger than 5 years, marked increases in alkaline phosphatase without clinical or laboratory evidence of liver or bone disease is most often because of benign transient hyperphosphatasemia
generally detected as an incidental finding during screening laboratory
evaluations or evaluations performed to assess a specific complaint.
The cause may be related to excess sialylation of alkaline phosphatase, which slows clearance. Cases often follow viral illness, including
SARS-­CoV-2 infection. Serum alkaline phosphatase values as high as
3,000-6,000 IU/L may be encountered. Liver and bone isoenzyme fractions are both elevated; there are no other clinical or laboratory signs
of hepatic or bone disease. Diagnosis is confirmed by a careful clinical
history plus laboratory assessments of calcium, phosphorus, creatine,
AST, ALT, GGT, bilirubin, PTH, and 25-­hydroxyvitamin D. A CBC
should also be drawn to rule out oncologic processes. Alkaline phosphatase should be followed serially (every 2-3 months) until resolution
is documented. The condition usually resolves within 16 weeks without
intervention and does not recur.
Juvenile Paget disease (familial hyperphosphatasemia, idiopathic
hyperphosphatasia or IHH) is a rare autosomal recessive bone disease hallmarked biochemically by marked serum ALP activity elevation. Most cases are because of loss-­of-­function variants in the tumor
necrosis factor receptor superfamily, member 11B gene (TNFRSF11B)
that encodes osteoprotegerin (OPG). OPG inhibits osteoclastogenesis
and osteoclast activity by preventing receptor activator of nuclear factor κ-­B (RANK) ligand (RANKL) from binding to its receptor RANK.
Affected children are asymptomatic at birth and gradually develop progressive long bone deformity (including kyphoscoliosis), bone pain,
and significant fractures. X-­rays show bowing and diaphyseal thickening, along with osteopenia (Fig. 748.1). Radiographically, the bony texture is variable; dense areas (showing a teased cotton-­wool appearance)
are interspersed with radiolucent areas and general demineralization.
Long bones appear cylindrical, lose metaphyseal modeling, and contain pseudocysts that show a dense, bony halo. Children with juvenile
Paget disease have short stature, large skulls with a thickened cranium
(widened diploë) that may be deformed, and progressive and profound
hearing loss. There is substantial phenotype variability; some cases are
diagnosed in infancy and others in late childhood. This disorder is distinct from adult Paget disease (osteitis deformans) because bone histology reveals a lack of normal cortical bone remodeling and an absence
of the classic mosaic pattern of lamellar bone found in the adult condition. Given the rarity of this disorder, there is no strong evidence
surrounding optimal clinical management; however, antiresorptive
therapy with bisphosphonates is associated with clinical, biochemical,
and radiographic improvement.

Fig. 748.1 Juvenile Paget disease showing bowing and thickening

of the diaphyses and osteopenia. (From Slovis T, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric
Diagnostic Imaging, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby, 2008. Fig. 167–226,
p. 2744.)

Other rare forms of hyperphosphatasia include expansile skeletal hyperphosphatasia (ESH) caused by dominant variants in the
TNFRSF11A gene encoding receptor activator of RANK, which regulates osteoclastogenesis, and hyperphosphatasia-­mental retardation
syndrome caused by recessive variants in PIGV in the glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-­anchor biosynthesis pathway.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 749

Osteoporosis
Rebecca J. Gordon and
Catherine M. Gordon
Osteoporosis, the most common bone disorder in adults, is relatively
uncommon in children and adolescents; the criteria that underlie this
diagnosis in young patients are a source of debate. This disorder is
characterized by diminished bone volume and a marked increase in
the prevalence of fractures. In contrast to osteomalacia, which shows
undermineralization and normal bone volume, histologic sections of
bone in all forms of osteoporosis reveal a normal degree of mineralization but a reduction in the volume of bone, especially trabecular
bone (vertebral bone). The diagnosis of osteoporosis in children and
adolescents requires evidence of skeletal fragility with: (1) a clinically
significant fracture history, which is defined as at least two long bone
fractures in children less than 10 years old, at least three long bone fractures by 19 years old, or any vertebral fractures; and (2) low bone density, with age, sex, and ancestry-­matched bone mineral density (BMD)
Z-score ≤ –2.0, assessed by dual-­energy x-­ray absorptiometry (DXA).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4384 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Blood values of minerals (e.g., calcium, phosphorus), vitamin D
metabolites, alkaline phosphatase, and parathyroid hormone are usually normal. Evaluation of bone mineral content and areal bone density
by DXA is the clinical gold standard for measuring BMD. DXA evaluation in patients 15 years of age or younger includes total body less head
and lumbar spine, and in those 16 years and older includes lumbar
spine and hip. In certain clinical scenarios, it may be useful to obtain
alternative sites, such as the distal femur or forearm scan. Additional
research modalities allow for the assessment of bone microarchitecture
(e.g., trabecular versus cortical bone), quality, and strength, such as
peripheral quantitative CT and trabecular bone score.
In the pediatric age group, osteoporosis may be primary or secondary (Table 749.1, Fig. 749.1). The primary osteoporoses can be
divided into heritable disorders of connective tissue, including osteogenesis imperfecta (see Chapter 742), Bruck syndrome, osteoporosis-­
pseudoglioma syndrome, Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome (see Chapter 744),
Marfan syndrome (see Chapter 743), homocystinuria, and idiopathic
juvenile osteoporosis. Secondary forms of osteoporosis include various neuromuscular disorders, chronic illness, endocrine disorders, and
drug-­induced and inborn errors of metabolism, including lysinuric
protein intolerance and Gaucher disease.
When no obvious primary or secondary cause can be detected,
idiopathic juvenile osteoporosis should be considered, especially if
the following clinical features are evident: onset before puberty, long
bone and lower back pain, vertebral fractures, long bone and metatarsal fractures, a washed-­out appearance of the spine and appendicular
skeleton on standard radiographs, and improvement of bone density
after puberty. Trabecular bones such as the spine and metatarsals are

particularly affected by atraumatic fractures. Several modes of therapy
(including oral calcium supplements, calcitriol, bisphosphonates, and
calcitonin) have been used with some success in individual conditions,
but the effect of these treatments is difficult to gauge because spontaneous recovery occurs after the onset of puberty in more than 75% of
cases.
Osteoporosis-­pseudoglioma syndrome is an autosomal recessive
disorder manifested by variable age at onset, low bone mass, fractures
in childhood, and abnormal eye development. It is caused by pathogenic loss of function variants in LRP5, which encodes the low-­density
lipoprotein receptor-­related protein 5. Interestingly, gain-­of-­function
pathogenic variants to this gene result in increased bone density.
The life-­cycle implications of either significant demineralization or
osteoporosis in childhood need to be stressed. Events in childhood influence peak bone mass, and late adolescence is a period of rapid bone
mineral accretion. Peak bone mass is typically achieved by 20-25 years
of age (depending on the bone measured), and the contribution during
childhood is considerable. A number of measures influence bone mass
including adequate calcium intake, vitamin D sufficiency, weight-­bearing
physical activity, and body mass index (BMI) within a healthy range.
General recommendations include achieving the recommended daily
allowance (RDA) of calcium for age. Excellent and convenient sources
of dietary calcium include dairy products, but also bony fish, green vegetables, and calcium-­supplemented drinks (e.g., orange juice). Yogurt and
hard cheeses can be used in many lactase-­deficient children. Also, a serum
25-­hydroxyvitamin D level between 30-50 ng/mL in those with known
threats to bone health can be beneficial to maximize calcium absorption
and ensure normal range parathyroid hormone. Weight-­bearing exercise

Table 749.1  Diagnoses That Confer Increased Risk for Osteoporosis
ENDOCRINE DISORDERS
Female Hypogonadism
Turner syndrome
Hypothalamic amenorrhea (female athletic triad)
Anorexia nervosa
Premature ovarian insufficiency
Depot medroxyprogesterone acetate therapy
Estrogen receptor α (ESR1) pathogenic variants
Hyperprolactinemia
Male Hypogonadism
Primary gonadal failure (Klinefelter syndrome)
Secondary gonadal failure (idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism)
Delayed puberty
Hyperthyroidism
Hyperparathyroidism
Hypercortisolism (therapeutic or Cushing disease)
Growth hormone deficiency
Thyrotoxicosis
INFLAMMATORY DISORDERS
Dermatomyositis
Chronic hepatitis
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS
Malabsorption syndromes (cystic fibrosis, celiac disease, biliary atresia)
True or perceived lactose intolerance
Inflammatory bowel disease
Chronic obstructive jaundice
Primary biliary cirrhosis and other cirrhoses
Alactasia
Subtotal gastrectomy

CONNECTIVE TISSUE/BONE DISORDERS
Idiopathic juvenile osteoporosis
Osteogenesis imperfecta
Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome
Marfan syndrome
Homocystinuria
Fibrous dysplasia
Previous or recurrent low impact fractures
Early-­onset osteoporosis with WNT1 pathogenic variants
X-­linked osteoporosis with fractures with PLS3 pathogenic variants
DRUGS
Alcohol
Heparin
Glucocorticoids
Thyroxine
Anticonvulsants
Gonadotropin-­releasing hormone agonists
Cyclosporine
Chemotherapy
Tobacco cigarettes
MISCELLANEOUS DISORDERS
Immobilization (cerebral palsy, spinal muscular atrophy, Duchenne
muscular dystrophy)
Chronic renal disease
Glycogen storage disease type 1
Chronic hepatitis
Hypophosphatasia
Low calcium dietary intake
Gaucher disease
Severe congenital neutropenia

BONE MARROW DISORDERS
Bone marrow transplant
Lymphoma
Leukemia
Hemolytic anemias (sickle cell anemia, thalassemia)
Systemic mastocytosis

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 749 u Osteoporosis 4385
The apparently healthy child with a history of multiple fractures
(excluding fractures secondary to severe trauma and crush fractures of fingers, toes, nose)

1. < 2 long bone fractures by 10 years of age
2. < 3 long bone fractures by 19 years of age
3. Fractures that are explainable by the severity
and exposure of the trauma

One or more of the following:
1. ≥ 2 long bone fractures by 10 years of age
2. ≥ 3 long bone fractures by 19 years of age
3. ≥ 1 vertebral compression fracture (≥20% height loss of vertebral body)

First-line evaluation
Pediatrician or family doctor

Exclude nonaccidental injury (particularly in infants)

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Review for family history of fractures or osteoporosis
Review of constitutional symptoms for underlying chronic medical condition
Nutritional and physical activity assessment
Examination: blue sclera, joint laxity, hyperflexibility, deformities
Growth and pubertal assessment
Investigations: calcium, phosphate, parathyroid hormone, 25(OH)D, renal
function, alkaline phosphatase, celiac screen, urine calcium, and creatinine
Lateral spine radiograph: to assess for presence of vertebral compression fractures
Lumbar spine and total body bone densitometry

Ensure adequate vitamin D, calcium intake,
and weight-bearing activity
Review again if further fractures occur

Initial Management
• Ensure adequate vitamin D, calcium intake, and weight-bearing activity
• If a secondary diagnosis is able to be made, treat and minimize the factors
contributing to increased bone fragility
Referral criteria to an Endocrinologist/Bone Health Clinic
• ≥1 vertebral compression fracture
• Z score ≤ −2.0
• Bone pain
• Clinical features suggestive of a primary osteoporosis

Does the child meet any of the criteria for
referral for specialist evaluation?

Yes

Specialist assessment for underlying etiology and
management of bone fragility
Further testing may include
• Genetic testing (COL1A1, COL1A2, and related genes)
• Histomorphometry of transiliac bone biopsy sample to
assess bone quality and turnover
Depending on clinical picture, further pharmacological
treatment with, for example, bisphosphonate therapy, may
be considered

No

•
•

Repeat bone densitometry in 1 year to ensure z score is
tracking or improving
If further fractures occur, or z score decreases over
time, refer for specialist review

Fig. 749.1 An algorithm for the management of a child presenting with a clinically significant fracture history. The algorithm outlines the initial eval-

uation, management, and when to consider referral for specialist review. (Data from Mayranpaa MK, Viljakainen HT, Toiviainen-­Salo S, et al. Impaired
bone health and asymptomatic vertebral compressions in fracture-­prone children: a case-­control study. J Bone Miner Res. 2012;27:1413–1424; and
Bishop N, Arundel P, Clark E, et al. Fracture prediction and the definition of osteoporosis in children and adolescents: the ISCD 2013 pediatric official
positions. J Clin Densitom. 2014;17:275–280.)

enhances bone formation and reduces bone resorption. Factors that can
prevent acquisition of peak bone mass include the use of alcohol and
tobacco. Because it appears that adult-­onset osteoporosis stems primarily from genetic factors, representing a complex trait interaction, specific
interventions during childhood to augment bone mass are not available.
The treatment of secondary osteoporosis is best achieved by treating
the underlying disorder when feasible (see Fig. 749.1). Hypogonadism
should be treated with hormone replacement therapy, but in adolescent
girls, nutritional issues should first be addressed and, ultimately, prescription of transdermal over oral estrogen (see Chapter 732). Calcium intake
should be increased to 1,500-2,000 mg/day. In glucocorticoid-­induced
osteoporosis, an emphasis is placed on the lowest possible dose to prevent
disease activity (e.g., in children with inflammatory bowel disease) with
alternate-­day dosing or, when appropriate, topical (e.g., eczema) or inhaled
(e.g., asthma) glucocorticoids. Special diets for inborn errors of metabolism are also appropriate, as well as enzymatic replacement for diseases
such as hypophosphatasia, a genetic disorder leading to deficient endogenous alkaline phosphatase production and defective bone mineralization.
Screening for celiac disease should be carried out in unexplained cases of
low bone mass, as adherence to a gluten-­free diet can significantly enhance
bone health in these patients (see Chapter 384).

Treatment with bisphosphonates that inhibit bone resorption in certain secondary (e.g., glucocorticoid-­induced) and adult-­onset osteoporosis has been successful. Bisphosphonate therapy can also be beneficial
for children and adolescents and has historically been used with osteogenesis imperfecta and cerebral palsy. The use of bisphosphonates has
expanded to additional patient populations with secondary osteoporosis, such as recurrent fractures and low bone mineral density, and
high risk for skeletal fragility because of their underlying medical conditions. In consultation with a metabolic bone expert, bisphosphonate
treatment should be considered in the following patient populations:
Duchenne muscular dystrophy, spinal muscular atrophy, and other
nonambulatory patients (i.e., cerebral palsy, metabolic disorders). All
modifiable risk factors should be addressed, including adequate calcium intake; sufficient vitamin D; weight-­bearing physical activity,
such as time within a stander and physical therapy; healthy range BMI;
and evaluation of overall heath (i.e., regular menstrual periods in adolescent girls, no other endocrinopathies, and optimizing the treatment
status of the underlying medical condition).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Rehabilitation Medicine

PART

XXXI

age range. Nonaccidental TBI remains a significant cause of TBI at this
age (20-­30 cases/100,000) (see Chapter 17). Falls (35.1%) and being
struck by or against an object (34.9%) are most common in those 5-­14
years of age. Assaults, falls, and motor vehicle injuries make up to 85%
of the TBI experienced in those 15-­24 years of age. TBI is more common in males than females at all ages.

Chapter 750

Rehabilitation for
Traumatic Brain Injury

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

Chong-­Tae Kim and J. Michael King

TBI is the consequence of primary and secondary injury (see Chapter
82). Primary injury results from direct physical impact. Secondary injury
is the consequence of aberrant neurochemical homeostasis after primary
injury (Fig. 750.1). This injury mechanism helps explain why individuals
may experience global dysfunction of the brain despite relatively small
or focal brain lesions on imaging studies. Minimizing secondary injury
is critical to preventing further brain insult after the primary injury.

Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is a major cause of pediatric disability
in children older than 1 year old in the United States (see Chapter 82).
According to data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2006–2010), TBI due to falls (72.8%) is most common in the 0-­4

Normal

PSH
Thalamus

Thalamus

Brain
level
PAG

PAG

Cortical centers

Cortical centers

Hypothalamus

Hypothalamus

Normal sensory input
and perception

Non-noxious stimuli
perceived as noxious Impaired descending
inhibition

Normal descending
inhibition

Normal descending inhibition

Impaired descending inhibition

Non-noxious sensory input
Spinal
level

Normal balance of
interneuron activity

Sympathetic output
Motor output

Non-noxious sensory input
Increased excitatory
interneuron activity

Increased sympathetic output
Increased motor
output

Fig. 750.1 Excitatory:inhibitory ratio model of the pathogenesis of PSH. In normal circumstances, various cortical, hypothalamic, thalamic, and

other subcortical inputs modulate activity within brainstem centers—the PAG is shown here as one of the key brainstem hubs in this process. These
brainstem nuclei provide inhibitory drive to spinal-­reflex arcs, thereby maintaining balance between inhibitory and excitatory interneuron influences
on motor and sympathetic efferents, allowing normal sensory stimuli to be perceived as nonnoxious. In the excitatory:inhibitory ratio model of PSH,
disconnection of descending inhibition produces maladaptive dendritic arborization and spinal-­circuit excitation, with nonnoxious stimuli triggering increased motor and sympathetic output (spinally) and potentially becoming perceived as noxious (centrally). PAG, Periaqueductal grey. PSH,
paroxysmal sympathetic hyperactivity. (From Meyfroidt G, Baguley IJ, Menon DK. Paroxysmal sympathetic hyperactivity: the storm after acute brain
injury. Lancet. 16:721–729, 2017 [Fig. 2].)

4386
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 750 u Rehabilitation for Traumatic Brain Injury
Very young children who have not yet closed their cranial sutures
accommodate some increase in intracranial pressure that may result
from TBI. However, young children have a relatively large head size
compared with their body, higher brain water content, and less myelination, all of which may contribute to greater brain distortion and injury
than from a comparable injury experienced by an adult.

SEVERITY

The acute severity of TBI is typically classified with the Pediatric Glasgow
Coma Scale (GCS) (see Chapter 82). GCS scores of 13-­15 are considered
mild TBI, 9-­12 moderate TBI, and 3-­8 severe TBI. Additional parameters
may be helpful in classifying severity. The longer the duration of loss of
consciousness (i.e., <30 min, <24 hr, or >24 hr), the more severe the TBI.
Longer duration of posttraumatic amnesia (<1 day, 1-­7 days, or >7 days)
is also reflective of a more severe TBI. Biomarkers (chemicals sensitive
to nerve tissues) are being investigated as potential indicators of severity.

MEDICAL COMPLICATIONS
Disorders of Consciousness

Children with severe TBI manifest various levels of altered consciousness (Table 750.1). They may progress from coma to unresponsive
wakefulness syndrome (formerly vegetative state) and/or minimally
conscious state. The longer the period of impaired consciousness, the
poorer the functional recovery. Rapid transition from coma/unresponsive wakefulness syndrome to a minimally conscious state increases
the possibility of better recovery. As patients recover from impaired
consciousness, they may have altered circadian sleep–wake patterns.
In this phase, it is particularly important to avoid overstimulation at
night, such as with procedures, and to avoid sedative medications during the day. A sleep diary over a period of several days to a week is a
useful measure to monitor sleep patterns and determine the effectiveness of medications. Neurostimulators (e.g., amantadine, bromocriptine, methylphenidate, or L-­dopa) may be used to improve arousal
during the day. Trazodone or melatonin may help facilitate sleep onset
or maintenance at night, respectively. Modafinil or donepezil can be

4387

tried if the above neurostimulators are ineffective. Paradoxically zolpidem has been reported to improve alertness in several cases.

Cognitive-­Behavioral Disorders

The management and outcome of mild TBI (concussion) are discussed
in Chapter 729. As patients with severe TBI recover from initial low
levels of consciousness, they may demonstrate significant cognitive-­
behavioral disorders, such as agitation, aggression, decreased frustration tolerance, impulsivity, inattention, emotional lability, perseveration,
impaired working memory, and poor safety awareness and judgement.
Agitation is common in the early stages of recovery. The first line of
management for agitation is to decrease excessive environmental, visual,
auditory, and tactile stimulation. Physical constraint is typically implemented as a last resort to prevent harm to the patient and others, and it
should be removed as soon as the danger has resolved. The Rancho Los
Amigo scale (RLAS) (Table 750.2) may be used to evaluate the level of
this impairment. It is important to exclude potential exacerbating factors or medical causes of impaired mental status and behavior, including
electrolyte abnormalities, infection, and concomitant injuries in patients
who incur multiple traumas including severe TBI. Posttraumatic amnesia can be particularly debilitating because it may limit the acquisition
and retention of new learning skills. The Children’s Orientation and
Amnesia Test may be helpful in determining when a patients’ posttraumatic amnesia has ended, after which these children may be candidates
for cognitive rehabilitation. This test assesses general orientation (name,
age, birthdate, school, etc.), temporal orientation (current time, day of
the week, year, etc.), and memory (verbal and nonverbal).
Most patients who have moderate or severe TBI will have varying degrees of long-­term residual cognitive impairments, which can
include impaired judgment, attention deficits, and impaired working
memory (see Chapter 49). The most rapid recovery in cognitive skills
tend to occur in the first year after the TBI. Children with more severe
injuries and children from lower socioeconomic status (SES) families
tend to have more significant long-­term deficits after a TBI.

Table 750.1  Level of Consciousness
COMA

UNRESPONSIVE
WAKEFULNESS SYNDROME

MINIMALLY CONSCIOUS
STATE (–)

MINIMALLY CONSCIOUS
STATE (+)

Eye opening

None

Spontaneous or to stimulus

Spontaneous

Spontaneous

Brain stem reflexes

None

Present

Present

Present

Orientation

None

None

Inconsistent

Consistent

Purposeful response

None

None

Trivial responses with localization (visual
fixation or tracking, localization to pain)

Evident reliable responses with
verbal, behavioral, and/or motor

Table 750.2  Rancho Los Amino Scale
LEVEL

COGNITIVE-­BEHAVIORAL CHARACTERISTICS

CLINICAL FEATURES

I

No response

Comatose state

II

Generalized response

Nonpurposeful, reflexive, stereotyped response to simulations

III

Localized response

Specifically localized (head turn, blink eye, grasp), consistent response to
stimulations

IV

Confused-­agitated

Confused and hyperactive or bizarre behavior

V

Confused-­inappropriate

Less agitated and able to follow simple instructions consistently but difficult to
follow complicated ones

VI

Confused-­appropriate

Still impaired recent memory, needs assistance for unfamiliar situations

VII

Automatic-­appropriate

Able to do daily routine independently but has difficulty solving problems

VIII

Purposeful-­appropriate

Independent and functional in activities at home and community but may have
some difficulties in stressful situations

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4388 Part XXXI u Rehabilitation Medicine
Posttraumatic Seizure

The incidence of posttraumatic seizure (PTS) is dependent on injury
severity and age. About 30–35% of children with severe TBI will
experience a PTS. Very early-­onset PTS may develop within 24 hours
after a TBI, early-­onset PTS within 7 days, and late onset more than
7 days after a TBI. Early-­onset PTS is more common in children,
and late-­onset PTS is more common in adults. The risk of late-­onset
PTS is increased in particularly severe TBI, those caused by penetrating injury, the presence of subdural hematoma, in injuries occurring
in children younger than 5 years, and in patients with a history of
early-­onset PTS. Prophylactic treatment with an antiepileptic medication for 7 days after a TBI is commonly prescribed (see Chapter 82).
However, treatment with an antiepileptic medication beyond 1 week
offers no further benefit as a prophylactic agent. The risk of PTS decreases
to the same incidence as in the general population after 5 years
from TBI.

Paroxysmal Sympathetic Hyperactivity

Paroxysmal sympathetic hyperactivity (PSH) is a constellation of
symptoms manifested by hyperthermia, tachycardia, tachypnea,
diaphoresis, and increased tone, including dystonic posturing. It is
primarily attributable to autonomic dysregulation. The mechanism
has not been clearly defined but is thought to be because of disruption of the inhibitory function of the mesencephalon on the diencephalon (see Fig. 750.1). Some drug-­related symptoms may mimic
the features of PSH and may require discontinuation and the use of
alternative medication; for example, haloperidol and chlorpromazine may cause neuroleptic malignant syndrome, and phenytoin
may precipitate a fever. The assessment measure pediatric PSH-­AM
is suggested to improve diagnostic sensitivity (Tables 750.3, 750.4,
and 750.5). There is no current established standard of care for
management of PSH, but bromocriptine, propranolol or labetalol,
clonidine, amantadine, intrathecal baclofen, morphine, benzodiazepine, and gabapentin have been prescribed with variable success.
Morphine, fentanyl, propofol, propranolol, and gabapentin have
consistently been effective in adult patients for both prevention and
treatment. Most patients require more than one class of medication
(opioid, beta blockers, alpha 2 agonists, neuromodulators, benzodiazepines, sarcolemmal calcium release blockers). Oral baclofen,
Dilantin, and carbamazepine are reported to be ineffective for PSH.
PSH is a negative factor for short-­term but not long-­term functional
outcomes.

Neuroendocrine Disorders

Hypothalamic-­pituitary injury that occurs with TBI can cause various endocrine disorders. Growth hormone deficiency is the most
common and results in growth retardation. Precocious puberty, more
common in females than males, may result from loss of neural inhibition on gonadotropin release. Three different types of salt and water
metabolism derangements, diabetes insipidus (DI), syndrome of
inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone (SIADH), and cerebral salt wasting (CSW) can develop after a severe TBI (see Chapter
82).

Spasticity

Spasticity is a major complication that develops in children with severe
TBI (see Chapter 752).

OUTCOME ASSOCIATED WITH SEVERE TRAUMATIC
BRAIN INJURY

Given different mechanisms of injury, younger children who incur
a severe brain injury tend to have better functional outcomes than
older children. However, given the same severity of TBI, the outcome of very young children is poorer than that of older children.
The age defined as “very young children” (2-­5 years) is variable
depending on the studies. The specific reason for this difference in
outcomes has not been identified, but a plausible explanation is that
although very young children demonstrate a higher potential for
neuroplasticity with focal brain injuries, their immature and developing brains are more vulnerable to the diffuse effects on the brain
of most forms of TBI.
The GCS score is a strong prognostic factor for mortality and
functional outcome in the acute injury phase but not for functional
outcome in the subacute or chronic phase for children within the
severe TBI group. Duration of posttraumatic amnesia or time to follow commands are better prognostic factors for long-­term functional
outcomes.
Cognitive and behavioral impairments (poor memory-­learning and
executive skills, hyperactivity, depression, awareness deficits) are the
most common and long-­lasting sequelae of TBI. These deficits can
inhibit successful school reentry and participation in social activities.
Given the same severity, the long-­term functional outcome of children
who sustain nonaccidental (inflicted) trauma is worse than that of children with other forms of TBI. Children who incur nonaccidental trauma
are typically very young. If developmentally delayed before their brain
injury, they are likely to have poorer long-­term functional outcomes. The

Table 750.3  Pediatric PSH-­AM
Pediatric Clinical Feature Scale (PCFS)
AGE
(YR)

0

1

2

3

1-­4

<110

100-­124

125-­139

≥140

5-­15

<100

100-­119

120-­139

≥140

1-­4

<30

30-­34

35-­39

≥40

5-­15

<25

25-­29

30-­34

≥35

1-­4

<100

100-­109

110-­119

≥120

5-­15

<120

120-­129

130-­139

≥140

1-­4

<65

65-­72

73-­79

≥80

5-­15

<75

75-­82

83-­89

≥90

Temperature

37

37-­37.9

38-­38.9

≥39

Sweating

Normal

Increased sweating

Localized diaphoresis

Generalized diaphoresis

Posturing (muscle tone) during episode

None

Mild increase

Neat increase

Generalized spasticity/opisthotonos

Heart rate

Respiratory rate

Systolic BP

Diastolic BP

Severity of CF (subtotal score of PCFS): Nil =0, Mild 1-­6, Moderate 7-­12, Severe ≥13
BP, Blood pressure; PSH-­AM, paroxysmal sympathetic hyperactivity-­assessment measure.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 751 u Spinal Cord Injury and Autonomic Dysreflexia Management
Table 750.4  Pediatric Diagnosis Likelihood Tool (PDLT)
PRESENT/­ABSENT (1/0)
1.	Clinical features occur
simultaneously
2.	Episodes are paroxysmal in nature
3.	Sympathetic overactivity to normally
nonpainful stimuli
4.	Features persist > 3 consecutive
days
5.	Features persist > 1 week postinjury
6.	Features persist despite treatment
of alternative differential diagnoses
7.	At least single episode daily
8.	Medication administered to
decrease sympathetic features
9.	Absence of parasympathetic
features during episodes
10.	Absence of other presumed cause
of features
11.	Antecedent acquired brain injury

Table 750.5  Pediatric PSH-­AM
PSH DIAGNOSTIC
LIKELIHOOD

COMBINED TOTAL
(PCFS + PDLT)

Unlikely

<8

Possible

8-­16

Probable

>17

PSH-AM, paroxysmal sympathetic hyperactivity assessment measure; PCFS, pediatric
clinical feature scale; PDLT, pediatric diagnosis likelihood tool.

long-­term functional outcome of children who sustain a TBI is better
than those who sustain a nontraumatic (anoxic) brain injury.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 751

Spinal Cord Injury and
Autonomic Dysreflexia
Management
Ashlee M. Jaffe and Abigail Case
See Chapter 81.
Individuals from birth to 21 years of age account for 25% of all cases
of traumatic spinal cord injury (SCI). Children are more susceptible
to lap-­belt injuries, upper cervical injuries, SCIs without radiologic
abnormalities (SCIWORA), and delayed onset of neurologic deficits,
ranging from 30 minutes to 4 days. A population-­based study found
the epidemiology of pediatric spinal injury in the US varies greatly by
age, ethnicity, and payor. Low-­income populations are more likely to
sustain spinal cord injury due to firearms than other populations.

4389

The most accurate way to evaluate a patient who has sustained an SCI
is by performing a standardized physical examination, as endorsed by the
International Standards for Neurological and Functional Classification
of SCI, recommended for children 6 years of age and older (Fig. 751.1).
Life expectancy is related to the neurologic level of injury and the American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) impairment scale classification.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Immediately after an SCI, there is typically a period of spinal shock
with low tone and absent reflexes. Eventually, signs of an upper motor
neuron lesion may emerge, including spasticity and involuntary muscle spasms. However, if there is a substantial segment of spinal cord
infarction present, patients may have persistent flaccid paralysis.
Children with neurologic levels of injury at T6 or above are at particular risk for interruption and decentralization of the autonomic nervous
system. The most common manifestations include bradycardia, hypotension, temperature dysregulation, and, once spinal shock has resolved,
autonomic dysreflexia (AD). AD is a sustained sympathetic response as
a result of a noxious stimulus below the level of injury. Symptoms resulting from AD typically include hypertension, bradycardia, headache, and
flushing of the skin above the level of injury, although vague symptoms
such as fatigue, irritability, or crying may be the presenting symptoms in
younger patients. Noxious stimuli resulting from bladder or rectal distention is a common cause of AD, but there are a large number of other causes
that need to be considered (Table 751.1). Children and adolescents with
cervical and upper thoracic level SCI have lower baseline blood pressures
(BPs) compared with the general population. Therefore caution should be
used when referencing age-­appropriate BPs because BP elevations of even
20-­40 mm Hg above this lower baseline may be suggestive of AD. Identification and treatment of the noxious stimulus is typically associated with
resolution of symptoms without the use of antihypertensive medication. If
necessary, antihypertensive agents with a rapid onset and short duration,
such as nifedipine and nitropaste, are advocated to treat elevated BP while
the underlying cause is identified (Fig. 751.2). Emergent management of
AD is necessary because of the risk of stroke and additional organ damage
resulting from sustained hypertension. Consideration of a medical alert
bracelet, education of supervising adults, and carrying of an AD emergency reference card is recommended (Fig. 751.3).
Patients with SCI are particularly vulnerable to deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism because of immobilization of their affected
limbs and venous stasis during the first 90 days after an injury. Deep venous
thromboses are more common in postpubertal children >14 years old
than in younger children. Mechanical prophylaxis (graduated compression stockings and sequential calf compression devices) are recommended
for all children with acute SCI; adolescents should also start anticoagulant thromboprophylaxis, especially if additional risk factors like lower
extremity fractures are present (unless contraindicated because of the risk
of bleeding or prior allergic response). Late-­occurring deep venous thrombosis most commonly occurs with prolonged immobilization related to
illness or surgery, and prophylactic measures should be continued during
these situations as well.
Consequent of SCI, patients often present with varying degrees of bowel
and bladder incontinence. After an SCI, the bladder can be areflexic or
hyperreflexic, and detrusor sphincter dyssynergia may occur. Clean intermittent catheterization (CIC) of the bladder is typically performed up to
4-­6 times/day to prevent urinary retention and vesicoureteral reflux. Constipation can negatively impact the success of a CIC program. Anticholinergic medications may improve bladder storage capacity and prevent
urinary incontinence between bladder catheterizations. Antibiotics are
only recommended for symptomatic urinary tract infections; asymptomatic
bacteriuria, without vesicoureteral reflux, is generally due to colonization
and typically not treated. If intermittent catheterization is required, one can
begin teaching the skills necessary for independent catheterization as early
as 3 years of age with a goal of obtaining complete independence by 5-­7
years old reflecting the progression toward independent bladder management of the child’s able-­bodied peers.
Bowel continence programs can be successfully introduced around
2-­4 years old. There should be an attempt to distinguish between upper
motor neuron (UMN) and lower motor neuron (LMN) bowel dysfunction because the management and bowel agents chosen may vary

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 751 u Spinal Cord Injury and Autonomic Dysreflexia Management
Table 750.4  Pediatric Diagnosis Likelihood Tool (PDLT)
PRESENT/­ABSENT (1/0)
1.	Clinical features occur
simultaneously
2.	Episodes are paroxysmal in nature
3.	Sympathetic overactivity to normally
nonpainful stimuli
4.	Features persist > 3 consecutive
days
5.	Features persist > 1 week postinjury
6.	Features persist despite treatment
of alternative differential diagnoses
7.	At least single episode daily
8.	Medication administered to
decrease sympathetic features
9.	Absence of parasympathetic
features during episodes
10.	Absence of other presumed cause
of features
11.	Antecedent acquired brain injury

Table 750.5  Pediatric PSH-­AM
PSH DIAGNOSTIC
LIKELIHOOD

COMBINED TOTAL
(PCFS + PDLT)

Unlikely

<8

Possible

8-­16

Probable

>17

PSH-AM, paroxysmal sympathetic hyperactivity assessment measure; PCFS, pediatric
clinical feature scale; PDLT, pediatric diagnosis likelihood tool.

long-­term functional outcome of children who sustain a TBI is better
than those who sustain a nontraumatic (anoxic) brain injury.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 751

Spinal Cord Injury and
Autonomic Dysreflexia
Management
Ashlee M. Jaffe and Abigail Case
See Chapter 81.
Individuals from birth to 21 years of age account for 25% of all cases
of traumatic spinal cord injury (SCI). Children are more susceptible
to lap-­belt injuries, upper cervical injuries, SCIs without radiologic
abnormalities (SCIWORA), and delayed onset of neurologic deficits,
ranging from 30 minutes to 4 days. A population-­based study found
the epidemiology of pediatric spinal injury in the US varies greatly by
age, ethnicity, and payor. Low-­income populations are more likely to
sustain spinal cord injury due to firearms than other populations.

4389

The most accurate way to evaluate a patient who has sustained an SCI
is by performing a standardized physical examination, as endorsed by the
International Standards for Neurological and Functional Classification
of SCI, recommended for children 6 years of age and older (Fig. 751.1).
Life expectancy is related to the neurologic level of injury and the American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) impairment scale classification.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Immediately after an SCI, there is typically a period of spinal shock
with low tone and absent reflexes. Eventually, signs of an upper motor
neuron lesion may emerge, including spasticity and involuntary muscle spasms. However, if there is a substantial segment of spinal cord
infarction present, patients may have persistent flaccid paralysis.
Children with neurologic levels of injury at T6 or above are at particular risk for interruption and decentralization of the autonomic nervous
system. The most common manifestations include bradycardia, hypotension, temperature dysregulation, and, once spinal shock has resolved,
autonomic dysreflexia (AD). AD is a sustained sympathetic response as
a result of a noxious stimulus below the level of injury. Symptoms resulting from AD typically include hypertension, bradycardia, headache, and
flushing of the skin above the level of injury, although vague symptoms
such as fatigue, irritability, or crying may be the presenting symptoms in
younger patients. Noxious stimuli resulting from bladder or rectal distention is a common cause of AD, but there are a large number of other causes
that need to be considered (Table 751.1). Children and adolescents with
cervical and upper thoracic level SCI have lower baseline blood pressures
(BPs) compared with the general population. Therefore caution should be
used when referencing age-­appropriate BPs because BP elevations of even
20-­40 mm Hg above this lower baseline may be suggestive of AD. Identification and treatment of the noxious stimulus is typically associated with
resolution of symptoms without the use of antihypertensive medication. If
necessary, antihypertensive agents with a rapid onset and short duration,
such as nifedipine and nitropaste, are advocated to treat elevated BP while
the underlying cause is identified (Fig. 751.2). Emergent management of
AD is necessary because of the risk of stroke and additional organ damage
resulting from sustained hypertension. Consideration of a medical alert
bracelet, education of supervising adults, and carrying of an AD emergency reference card is recommended (Fig. 751.3).
Patients with SCI are particularly vulnerable to deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism because of immobilization of their affected
limbs and venous stasis during the first 90 days after an injury. Deep venous
thromboses are more common in postpubertal children >14 years old
than in younger children. Mechanical prophylaxis (graduated compression stockings and sequential calf compression devices) are recommended
for all children with acute SCI; adolescents should also start anticoagulant thromboprophylaxis, especially if additional risk factors like lower
extremity fractures are present (unless contraindicated because of the risk
of bleeding or prior allergic response). Late-­occurring deep venous thrombosis most commonly occurs with prolonged immobilization related to
illness or surgery, and prophylactic measures should be continued during
these situations as well.
Consequent of SCI, patients often present with varying degrees of bowel
and bladder incontinence. After an SCI, the bladder can be areflexic or
hyperreflexic, and detrusor sphincter dyssynergia may occur. Clean intermittent catheterization (CIC) of the bladder is typically performed up to
4-­6 times/day to prevent urinary retention and vesicoureteral reflux. Constipation can negatively impact the success of a CIC program. Anticholinergic medications may improve bladder storage capacity and prevent
urinary incontinence between bladder catheterizations. Antibiotics are
only recommended for symptomatic urinary tract infections; asymptomatic
bacteriuria, without vesicoureteral reflux, is generally due to colonization
and typically not treated. If intermittent catheterization is required, one can
begin teaching the skills necessary for independent catheterization as early
as 3 years of age with a goal of obtaining complete independence by 5-­7
years old reflecting the progression toward independent bladder management of the child’s able-­bodied peers.
Bowel continence programs can be successfully introduced around
2-­4 years old. There should be an attempt to distinguish between upper
motor neuron (UMN) and lower motor neuron (LMN) bowel dysfunction because the management and bowel agents chosen may vary

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4390 Part XXXI u Rehabilitation Medicine

Fig. 751.1 American Spinal Injury Association standards worksheet. (From the American Spinal Injury Association: International standards for neurological and functional classification of spinal cord injury [ISNCSCI]. Richmond, Virginia, 2019, https://asia-­spinalinjury.org/international-standardsneurological-classification-sci-isncsci-worksheet/.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 751 u Spinal Cord Injury and Autonomic Dysreflexia Management
Table 751.1  Potential Etiologies of Noxious Stimuli
Causing Autonomic Dysreflexia
URINARY SYSTEM
• Bladder distention
• Bladder or kidney stones
• Blocked/kinked catheter
• Detrusor sphincter dyssynergia
• Urinary tract infection
• Urologic instrumentation
• Shock wave lithotripsy
GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM
• Bowel distention
• Bowel impaction
• Gallstones
• Appendicitis
• Gastric ulcers
• Gastritis
• Gastrointestinal instrumentation
• Hemorrhoids
INTEGUMENTARY SYSTEM
• Constrictive clothing, shoes, or orthotics
• Blisters
• Burns, sunburn, or frostbite
• Ingrown toenail
• Insect bites
• Pressure ulcers
MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM
• Fractures
• Heterotopic ossification
• Functional electrical stimulation
REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM—MALE
• Epididymitis
• Scrotal compression (sitting on scrotum)
• Sexual intercourse
• Sexually transmitted infections
REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM—FEMALE
• Menstruation
• Pregnancy, especially labor and delivery
• Vaginitis
• Sexual intercourse
• Sexually transmitted infections
HEMATOLOGIC SYSTEM
• Deep vein thrombosis
• Pulmonary embolus
OTHER SYSTEMIC CAUSES
• Boosting (an episode of autonomic dysreflexia intentionally
caused by an athlete with spinal cord injury in an attempt to
enhance physical performance)
• Excessive alcohol intake
• Excessive caffeine or diuretic intake
• Over-­the-­counter or prescribed stimulants
• Substance abuse
From Consortium for Spinal Cord Medicine: Acute management of autonomic
dysreflexia: individuals with spinal cord injury presenting to health-­care facilities,
Washington, DC, 2001, Paralyzed Veterans of America, 10–11.

significantly. Lesions at or proximal to the conus medullaris typically
result in UMN bowel dysfunction, whereas lesions distal to the conus
typically result in LMN bowel dysfunction characterized by an areflexic
bowel lacking peristalsis. Management of bowel incontinence requires
the use of diet modifications, bowel medications, and planned evacuations. Emptying is facilitated by use of the gastrocolic reflex, digital
stimulation, suppositories, and enemas in those with UMN bowel
dysfunction. Individuals with LMN bowel dysfunction often require
manual removal because peristalsis and reflexes are not intact.
Individuals with SCI have increased risk for dysphagia, delayed gastric
emptying, ileus, gastric ulcerations, pancreatitis, and superior mesenteric
artery syndrome. Presentation of an acute abdomen in SCI is challenging
to identify because a patient may be incapable of feeling the pain intensity

4391

Patient with spinal cord injury demonstrates signs/
symptoms of autonomic dysreflexia: blood pressure
elevation >15 mm Hg above patient’s baseline, pounding
frontal headache, bradycardia or tachycardia, flushing of
skin and/or diaphoresis above level of injury, anxiety

Obtain vital signs, including heart rate, blood pressure, and
temperature, and repeat vital signs every 5 min

Elevate head of bed unless contraindicated.
Reposition patient and loosen tight clothing. Assess for
potential noxious stimuli (wounds, brace creating
pressure, etc.) (see Table 751.1)

Bladder management: empty bladder through
catheterization using 2% xylocaine jelly as lubricant. If
indwelling catheter is in place, ensure catheter is not
plugged or kinked

If blood pressure remains elevated, proceed with bowel
management: examine the rectum after inserting 2%
xylocaine jelly and gently remove any stool if present

If blood pressure remains elevated, consider use of rapidonset and short-duration antihypertensives:
• Nifedipine: 0.25–0.5 mg/kg/dose every 4–6 hr (maximum 10 mg/dose)
• Nitropaste 2%: titrating to effect, 1 inch above level of injury, starting with
1/2 inch and increasing by 1/2 inch increments to achieve desired results.
Remember to wipe away excess nitropaste after results are obtained

Fig. 751.2 Algorithm for the management of autonomic dysreflexia.
typically associated with an intraabdominal disorder. As a result, an acute
abdomen may be manifested by nonspecific signs and symptoms, such as
vomiting, poorly localized dull pain, restlessness, fever, and leukocytosis.
Frequent monitoring for skin breakdown and pressure ulcers is
necessary, both acutely as well as lifelong. Pressure ulcers may heal
more slowly in patients with SCI and can significantly impact function. Common locations include the occiput, elbows, sacrum, ischium,
and heels. Devices such as halo vests and splints increase the risk of
developing a pressure sore. Frequent inspection and repositioning for
pressure relief when in bed and when sitting are important measures to
minimize the risk of pressure ulcer development.
Depending on the level of the lesion, paralysis of the diaphragm or intercostal and abdominal muscles can result in restrictive ventilatory impairment and ineffective coughing. Respiratory muscle training, abdominal
binders, and noninvasive ventilation and airway clearance devices, such
as the insufflator–exsufflator cough assist device, should be considered in
select patients.
Spasticity typically increases with noxious stimulation and can
interfere with sleep, comfort, positioning, and care (see Chapter 752).
Untreated spasticity can lead to contracture development and functional limitations. Management includes pharmacologic therapy,
stretching, splinting, and positioning to reduce tone. Focal spasticity
can be treated with chemodenervation by injecting botulinum toxin
into select hypertonic muscles or phenol perineurally. Intrathecal
baclofen may be an option for severe generalized spasticity or spasticity that is predominately in the lower extremities.
Increased bone resorption occurs as a result of prolonged immobilization. If excessive calcium is not adequately excreted by the kidneys,
insidious onset of abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, lethargy, polydipsia, polyuria, and behavior changes may occur. This immobilization

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4392 Part XXXI u Rehabilitation Medicine

Fig. 751.3 Example of pediatric autonomic dysreflexia emergency card, which can be downloaded in multiple languages for free from the Christopher & Dana Reeve Foundation Paralysis Resource Center website (https://www.christopherreeve.org/living-­with-­paralysis/free-­resources-­and-­
downloads/wallet-­cards).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 751 u Spinal Cord Injury and Autonomic Dysreflexia Management
hypercalcemia is managed with IV normal saline and the bisphosphonate pamidronate. Failure to manage the immobilization hypercalcemia
may result in nephrocalcinosis, urolithiasis, or renal failure. Loss of bone
mineral density begins immediately after an SCI occurs and osteopenia
plateaus 6-­12 months later. This may result in pathologic fractures, with
the most common sites of fracture including the supracondylar region
of the femur and the proximal tibia. Precautions are necessary because
fractures may occur with minor trauma, range of motion exercises, and
gait training. Treatment should include the use of removable splints or
casts that are well padded over bony prominences to prevent skin breakdown, which is more likely with insensate skin under the cast. Prevention through progressive weight bearing, if feasible and safe, and calcium
and vitamin D supplementation is encouraged.
The risk of development of spinal deformities and scoliosis is about 25%
in patients sustaining SCI both before and during puberty, and some of these
children will require surgical correction. Because of the high incidence of
scoliosis in patients younger than 15 at the time of their injury, radiographs
of the thoracolumbar-­sacral spine should generally be obtained every 6
months before skeletal maturity and every 12 months thereafter. Children
who sustain injuries before puberty are also susceptible to hip dislocation
and require periodic screening for this condition. Although neurologic
heterotopic ossification is less prevalent in children compared with adults,
it may occur on average about 4 months, but up to 14 months, after the
initial injury. The most common site of heterotopic ossification is the hip,
but it may also occur in the knee, elbow, and shoulder.
Children and adolescents with SCI are at risk for decreased muscle
mass, insulin resistance, decreased glucose transport, dyslipidemia, obesity, and decreased bone health as they age. Long term, patients with SCI
have a 3-­5-­fold greater odds of cardiovascular disease compared with

4393

able-­bodied individuals. Nutrition education and monitoring are important for decreasing long-­term morbidities. Promoting exercise and physical activity and fitness are important for well-­being. Youth with SCI may
develop latex allergy thought to be a result of repeated, early exposure to
latex products; thus a latex-­free environment and degree of suspicion for
allergies to bananas, kiwis, avocados, or chestnuts is advised.
Psychologic adjustment to SCI is influenced by the developmental age
at the time of injury. SCI will impact the child’s psychosocial development,
so adjustment should be monitored closely. Long-­term outcomes related
to coping, depression, and anxiety are better in adults who sustained their
injury during childhood, compared with those who sustained their injuries in adulthood. Positive coping strategies and strong social supports are
associated with greater social participation. Education regarding sexual
development and function with SCI injury should be provided.

PROGNOSIS

Prognosis for functional recovery after an SCI depends on the neurologic level of injury and the level of completeness. Examination at least
72 hours after injury has been determined to be a better indicator of
the prognosis than earlier examinations. Reexamination after recovery from spinal shock provides additional prognostic information. It
is prudent for those determining and communicating the diagnosis
to understand the limitations of the anorectal examinations, and thus
completeness of injury, unique to children. Those individuals with
an initial incomplete injury have an increased likelihood of eventual
neurologic recovery. The neurologic level of injury can be helpful in
determining the level of independence with functional activities (Table
751.2). The use of technology in rehabilitation encourages the pediatric
patient to become more engaged in their own care and advance their

Table 751.2  Projected Functional Outcomes at 1 Year After Injury and/or Diagnosis According to Neurologic Level of Injury
C1-­C4

C5

C6

C7

C8-­ T1

Feeding

Dependent

Independent with
adaptive equipment

Independent

Independent

Independent

Dressing—Upper
Body

Dependent

Independent with
adaptive equipment

Independent

Independent

Independent

Dressing—Lower
Body

Dependent

Independent with
adaptive equipment

Independent with
adaptive equipment

Independent with
adaptive equipment

Independent with
adaptive equipment

Bathing

Dependent

Dependent

Dependent

Some assistance to
independent with
equipment

Independent

Bed mobility

Dependent

Dependent

Some assistance to
independent

Independent

Independent

Transfers— Level
Surface

Dependent

Dependent

Some assistance to
independent

Independent

Independent

Wheelchair
Propulsion

Independent with
power; dependent
with manual

Independent with
power; may be
independent with
manual on level
surfaces

Independent

Independent

Independent

Driving

Dependent

May be independent
with adaptations

Independent

Independent

Independent

T2-­T9

T10-­L2

L3-­L5

Activities of daily
living (feeding,
dressing bathing)

Independent

Independent

Independent

Transfers

Independent

Independent

Independent

Ambulation

Standing in frame, tilt
table, or standing
wheelchair Exercise
only

Household
ambulation with
orthosis

Community
ambulation is
possible

Adapted from Hornyak J, Wernimont C: Spinal cord injuries. In: Murphy K, McMahon M, Houtrow A eds. Pediatric Rehabilitation: Principles and Practice, 6th ed. New York: Demos
Medical Publishing, 2021.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4394 Part XXXI u Rehabilitation Medicine
independence, which is correlated with higher quality of life. Common
technology includes therapeutic and functional stimulation, EMG
biofeedback and EMG-­triggered stimulation, assistive technology for
computer access, and implanted functional electrical stimulation system including phrenic nerve stimulators.

reduction while minimizing adverse cognitive effects. Oral baclofen
is considered a first-­line medication for the management of dystonia in CP with common indications including pain or difficulty
sleeping associated with dystonia. Abrupt cessation of oral or ITB
baclofen must be avoided because of withdrawal potential.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

α2-­Adrenergic Agents

Chapter 752

Spasticity
Joyce L. Oleszek and Loren T. Davidson
Spasticity is a component of the upper motor neuron syndrome
characterized by velocity-­dependent resistance to passive range of
motion, resulting in tonic stretch reflexes and accompanied by exaggerated tendon jerks. Spasticity management is determining what
degree of spasticity may be tolerable and of functional benefit versus
detrimental.
When devising a treatment plan, both the positive and negative
effects of spasticity on function must be considered. Treatment
should maximize function, independence, comfort, and quality of
life while minimizing sedation and adverse effects. Management
strategies including systemic medications, injections, and surgery
are reviewed.

SYSTEMIC MEDICATIONS

Systemic medications are used as a treatment for generalized spasticity (Table 752.1). Although efficacy of certain antispasmodics has been
demonstrated, their use should be contingent on functional benefit
because adverse effects are quite common. Frequently used medications include baclofen, benzodiazepines, dantrolene sodium, tizanidine, clonidine, and trihexyphenidyl.

GABAergic Medications

γ-­Aminobutyric acid (GABA) is an inhibitory neurotransmitter of
the central nervous system. The two most relevant GABA receptors
for the purposes of pharmacologic management of spasticity are
GABAA and GABAB. Benzodiazepines exert their effect by increasing the affinity of GABA for the GABAA receptor. This results in
presynaptic inhibition and a net inhibitory effect at both spinal and
supraspinal levels. Of the benzodiazepines, diazepam is a commonly
used medication to treat spasticity because of its long half-­life and
need for less frequent administration. In children younger than 2
years of age, clonazepam is a good option because of the availability
of a liquid formulation and dosing guidelines. Sedation and cognitive slowing limit the usefulness of this class of medications in children. However, benzodiazepines can be helpful for dystonic storms
or disturbed sleep in children with cerebral palsy (CP). The use of
benzodiazepines may lead to physiologic dependence; thus abrupt
discontinuation should be avoided to prevent withdrawal.
Baclofen is a GABAB agonist and a preferred agent in the treatment of spasticity of spinal origin. Baclofen exerts an inhibitory
effect on both monosynaptic and polysynaptic spinal reflexes, but
its supraspinal receptor sites can result in sedation as is common
to all GABAergic medications. Daytime dosing of oral baclofen is
often better tolerated than benzodiazepines with regard to sedation.
Intrathecal administration of baclofen via an intrathecal baclofen
(ITB) pump (see later) allows greater selectivity of spasticity

Clonidine and tizanidine are examples of centrally acting α2-­
adrenergic agonists that decrease spasticity and have an anti-­
nociceptive effect. Clonidine is used more frequently as an antihypertensive. Clonidine exerts its effect on spasticity via both
presynaptic inhibition of sensory afferents as well as release of glutamate at the level of the spinal cord. In comparison to clonidine,
tizanidine has less-­potent hemodynamic effects, which is desirable
when used primarily for spasticity reduction. However, tizanidine
is extensively metabolized by the liver, so hepatic impairment may
have a significant effect on its pharmacokinetics. Although clonidine and tizanidine are used widely as antispasmodics in practice,
there is limited evidence for their use in reducing spasticity in
children with CP. Tizanidine’s antispasticity effect has been demonstrated in adults with multiple sclerosis and spinal cord injury.
Clonidine has been shown to be effective for disturbed sleep associated with severe hypertonia. The adverse effect profile of these
agents can limit their use.

Peripherally Acting Calcium Blockers

Dantrolene sodium works at the level of skeletal muscle to block calcium release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Despite its peripheral
site of action, dantrolene may induce sedation, although to a lesser
degree than other centrally acting agents. A few small studies have
shown that dantrolene decreases clonus and spasticity but can also
decrease strength. Dantrolene is often well tolerated in children, but its
risk of hepatotoxicity requires monitoring of liver function tests. Hepatotoxicity risk increases with age, increasing dose, and female gender
(see Table 752.1).

INJECTION MANAGEMENT

Injection management of spasticity should be considered when
spasticity causes significant functional impairments that are refractory to more conservative options. Combining treatment options
such as injections and systemic medications can be very effective.
Botulinum toxin (BoNT) and phenol injections are used to
treat localized spasticity. OnabotulinumtoxinA (Botox) and AbobotulinumtoxinA (Dysport) have obtained U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) approval for both upper and lower limb
spasticity in pediatrics. RimabotulinumtoxinB (Myobloc) and IncobotulinumtoxinA (Xeomin) both have FDA approval but neither
have a pediatric indication. BoNT is derived from the bacteria Clostridium botulinum, and there are seven immunologically distinct
serotypes designated A through G. Its mechanism of action involves
a light chain protein binding to synaptobrevin at the neuromuscular junction, inhibiting vesicles from anchoring to the cell membrane and preventing acetylcholine release from the presynaptic
membrane. This interferes with nerve impulse transmission and
results in weakness of the muscle injected. Onset of action is within
2 weeks of administration, duration is 3-­6 months, and effects
wane as the neuromuscular junction reestablishes its original function. Injections should be administered no more frequently than
every 3 months to reduce neutralizing antibody formation, which
occurs in 1–2% of treated individuals. BoNT-­A is a safe and effective treatment for spasticity in the upper and lower extremities in
children with CP, but the effects on long-­term functional improvement with repeated injections are less well known. The combination of BoNT-­A injections to the gastrocnemius muscles and serial
casting has been shown to improve ankle range of motion and gait.
BoNT-­A can also improve ease of care and comfort in nonambulatory children with CP. The most common adverse events (AEs)
include localized pain and weakness, unsteadiness and increased
falls, fatigue, urinary incontinence, and dysphagia. Systemic AEs

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4394 Part XXXI u Rehabilitation Medicine
independence, which is correlated with higher quality of life. Common
technology includes therapeutic and functional stimulation, EMG
biofeedback and EMG-­triggered stimulation, assistive technology for
computer access, and implanted functional electrical stimulation system including phrenic nerve stimulators.

reduction while minimizing adverse cognitive effects. Oral baclofen
is considered a first-­line medication for the management of dystonia in CP with common indications including pain or difficulty
sleeping associated with dystonia. Abrupt cessation of oral or ITB
baclofen must be avoided because of withdrawal potential.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

α2-­Adrenergic Agents

Chapter 752

Spasticity
Joyce L. Oleszek and Loren T. Davidson
Spasticity is a component of the upper motor neuron syndrome
characterized by velocity-­dependent resistance to passive range of
motion, resulting in tonic stretch reflexes and accompanied by exaggerated tendon jerks. Spasticity management is determining what
degree of spasticity may be tolerable and of functional benefit versus
detrimental.
When devising a treatment plan, both the positive and negative
effects of spasticity on function must be considered. Treatment
should maximize function, independence, comfort, and quality of
life while minimizing sedation and adverse effects. Management
strategies including systemic medications, injections, and surgery
are reviewed.

SYSTEMIC MEDICATIONS

Systemic medications are used as a treatment for generalized spasticity (Table 752.1). Although efficacy of certain antispasmodics has been
demonstrated, their use should be contingent on functional benefit
because adverse effects are quite common. Frequently used medications include baclofen, benzodiazepines, dantrolene sodium, tizanidine, clonidine, and trihexyphenidyl.

GABAergic Medications

γ-­Aminobutyric acid (GABA) is an inhibitory neurotransmitter of
the central nervous system. The two most relevant GABA receptors
for the purposes of pharmacologic management of spasticity are
GABAA and GABAB. Benzodiazepines exert their effect by increasing the affinity of GABA for the GABAA receptor. This results in
presynaptic inhibition and a net inhibitory effect at both spinal and
supraspinal levels. Of the benzodiazepines, diazepam is a commonly
used medication to treat spasticity because of its long half-­life and
need for less frequent administration. In children younger than 2
years of age, clonazepam is a good option because of the availability
of a liquid formulation and dosing guidelines. Sedation and cognitive slowing limit the usefulness of this class of medications in children. However, benzodiazepines can be helpful for dystonic storms
or disturbed sleep in children with cerebral palsy (CP). The use of
benzodiazepines may lead to physiologic dependence; thus abrupt
discontinuation should be avoided to prevent withdrawal.
Baclofen is a GABAB agonist and a preferred agent in the treatment of spasticity of spinal origin. Baclofen exerts an inhibitory
effect on both monosynaptic and polysynaptic spinal reflexes, but
its supraspinal receptor sites can result in sedation as is common
to all GABAergic medications. Daytime dosing of oral baclofen is
often better tolerated than benzodiazepines with regard to sedation.
Intrathecal administration of baclofen via an intrathecal baclofen
(ITB) pump (see later) allows greater selectivity of spasticity

Clonidine and tizanidine are examples of centrally acting α2-­
adrenergic agonists that decrease spasticity and have an anti-­
nociceptive effect. Clonidine is used more frequently as an antihypertensive. Clonidine exerts its effect on spasticity via both
presynaptic inhibition of sensory afferents as well as release of glutamate at the level of the spinal cord. In comparison to clonidine,
tizanidine has less-­potent hemodynamic effects, which is desirable
when used primarily for spasticity reduction. However, tizanidine
is extensively metabolized by the liver, so hepatic impairment may
have a significant effect on its pharmacokinetics. Although clonidine and tizanidine are used widely as antispasmodics in practice,
there is limited evidence for their use in reducing spasticity in
children with CP. Tizanidine’s antispasticity effect has been demonstrated in adults with multiple sclerosis and spinal cord injury.
Clonidine has been shown to be effective for disturbed sleep associated with severe hypertonia. The adverse effect profile of these
agents can limit their use.

Peripherally Acting Calcium Blockers

Dantrolene sodium works at the level of skeletal muscle to block calcium release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Despite its peripheral
site of action, dantrolene may induce sedation, although to a lesser
degree than other centrally acting agents. A few small studies have
shown that dantrolene decreases clonus and spasticity but can also
decrease strength. Dantrolene is often well tolerated in children, but its
risk of hepatotoxicity requires monitoring of liver function tests. Hepatotoxicity risk increases with age, increasing dose, and female gender
(see Table 752.1).

INJECTION MANAGEMENT

Injection management of spasticity should be considered when
spasticity causes significant functional impairments that are refractory to more conservative options. Combining treatment options
such as injections and systemic medications can be very effective.
Botulinum toxin (BoNT) and phenol injections are used to
treat localized spasticity. OnabotulinumtoxinA (Botox) and AbobotulinumtoxinA (Dysport) have obtained U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) approval for both upper and lower limb
spasticity in pediatrics. RimabotulinumtoxinB (Myobloc) and IncobotulinumtoxinA (Xeomin) both have FDA approval but neither
have a pediatric indication. BoNT is derived from the bacteria Clostridium botulinum, and there are seven immunologically distinct
serotypes designated A through G. Its mechanism of action involves
a light chain protein binding to synaptobrevin at the neuromuscular junction, inhibiting vesicles from anchoring to the cell membrane and preventing acetylcholine release from the presynaptic
membrane. This interferes with nerve impulse transmission and
results in weakness of the muscle injected. Onset of action is within
2 weeks of administration, duration is 3-­6 months, and effects
wane as the neuromuscular junction reestablishes its original function. Injections should be administered no more frequently than
every 3 months to reduce neutralizing antibody formation, which
occurs in 1–2% of treated individuals. BoNT-­A is a safe and effective treatment for spasticity in the upper and lower extremities in
children with CP, but the effects on long-­term functional improvement with repeated injections are less well known. The combination of BoNT-­A injections to the gastrocnemius muscles and serial
casting has been shown to improve ankle range of motion and gait.
BoNT-­A can also improve ease of care and comfort in nonambulatory children with CP. The most common adverse events (AEs)
include localized pain and weakness, unsteadiness and increased
falls, fatigue, urinary incontinence, and dysphagia. Systemic AEs

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 752 u Spasticity 4395
Table 752.1  Dosing Guidelines, Pharmacologic Actions, and Adverse Event Profile of Commonly Prescribed Oral
Antispasmodic Medications for Children
MEDICATION/DOSING GUIDELINES

PHARMACOLOGIC ACTIONS

ADVERSE REACTIONS/PRECAUTIONS

BACLOFEN

• Centrally acting, structural analog of
GABA
• Binds to GABAB receptors causing
presynaptic inhibition of mono/
polysynaptic spinal reflexes
• Rapid absorption, blood level peaks in
1 hr, half-­life 5.5 hr.
• Renal excretion (70–80% unchanged)
• Hepatic excretion (15%)

• CNS depression (sedation, fatigue)
• Nausea
• Headache
• Dizziness
• Confusion
• Euphoria
• Hallucinations
• Hypotonia
• Ataxia
• Paraesthesias
Note: Abrupt withdrawal may cause seizures,
hallucinations, rebound muscle spasms, and
hyperpyrexia.

• Centrally acting, binds to GABAA
receptors mediating presynaptic
inhibition in brainstem reticular
formation and spinal polysynaptic
pathways
• Rapid absorption, blood level peaks in
1 hr, with half-­life of 30-­60 hr

• CNS depression (sedation, impaired memory,
and impaired attention)
• Ataxia
• Dependence/potential for substance abuse/
overdose
• Withdrawal syndrome (including anxiety,
agitation, irritability, tremor, muscle twitching,
nausea, insomnia, seizures, hyperpyrexia)
• Increased potential for adverse effects with low
albumin levels due to being 98% protein bound

• Peripheral action, blocking release of
calcium from sarcoplasmic reticulum
with uncoupling of nerve excitation and
skeletal muscle contraction
• Blood level peaks in 3-­6 hr (active
metabolite 4-­8 hr), half-­life of approx.
15 hr

• Malaise
• Fatigue
• Nausea
• Vomiting
• Diarrhea
• Muscle weakness with high dose
Note: Hepatotoxicity (baseline liver function tests
MUST be checked before starting dantrolene,
tested weekly during dose titration and regularly
every 1-­2 months thereafter). Drug should be
discontinued promptly if liver enzymes become
elevated.

• Centrally acting, alpha2 adrenoceptor
agonist activity at both spinal and
supraspinal sites. Prevents release of
excitatory amino acids, facilitating
presynaptic inhibition
• Good oral absorption, blood level peaks
in 1-­2 hr, half-­life of 2.5 hr

• Dry mouth
• Drowsiness
• Headache
• Dizziness
• Insomnia
• Anxiety
• Aggression
• Mood swings
• Visual hallucinations
• Risk of hypotension (although 10 times less anti-­
hypertensive potency than clonidine)
• Nausea/vomiting
• Constipation
• Liver function tests should be monitored; baseline
and 1 month after maintenance dose achieved.

• Centrally acting, mixed alpha
adrenoceptor agonist with predominant
alpha-­2 activity causing membrane
hyperpolarization at multiple sites in
brain, brainstem, and dorsal horns of
spinal cord.
• Rapidly absorbed orally, blood level
peaks in 1-­1½ hr, half-­life of 6-­20 hr.

• Drowsiness
• Dry mouth
• Bradycardia
• Orthostatic hypotension
• Abrupt cessation may result in rebound
hypertension.

0.125-­1 mg/kg/day
2-­7 yr:
2.5-­10 mg tid-­qid (10-­40 mg/day)
8-­12 yr:
5 mg-­15 mg tid-­qid (15-­60 mg/day)
12-­16 yr:
5-­20 mg tid-­qid (20-­80 mg/day)
Note: Caution advised with renal
impairment; consider reducing dose.
DIAZEPAM
0.12-­0.8 mg/kg/day
6 mo-­12 yr:
0.12-­0.8 mg/kg/day PO divided q 6-­8h
>12 yr:
2-­10 mg PO bid-­qid
Note: Starting a qhs dose only or
proportionately larger dose at bedtime
may limit excessive daytime sedation.
DANTROLENE SODIUM
3-­12 mg/kg /day
>5 yr:
6-­8 mg/kg/d PO divided bid-­qid
Start 0.5 mg/kg qd-­bid for 7 days, then 0.5
mg/kg tid for 7 days, then 1 mg/kg tid for
7 days, then 2 mg/kg tid to a maximum of
12 mg/kg/d or 400 mg/day.

TIZANIDINE
<10 yr:
Initiate 1 mg orally at bedtime initially,
increasing to 0.3-­0.5 mg/kg in 4 divided
doses
>10 yr:
Commence 2 mg orally at bedtime
initially, increased according to response,
maximum 24 mg/day in 3-­4 divided
doses

CLONIDINE
0.025-0.1 mg/day in 2-­3 divided doses.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4396 Part XXXI u Rehabilitation Medicine
can occur in up to 3.6% of children with CP receiving BoNT-­A,
and those with a history of dysphagia and/or aspiration pneumonia are at increased risk. The FDA requires black box labeling on
BoNT products, cautioning of a rare but potentially life-­threatening
complication of BoNT effects spreading beyond the injection site.
Co-­administration of BoNT and other agents interfering with neuromuscular transmission, such as aminoglycosides and curare-­like
agents, should be performed with caution because the effect of the
toxin may be potentiated.
Phenol neurolysis can be used in combination with BoNT injections
to allow treatment of more affected muscles while remaining within the
safe dose range of BoNT. Phenol causes nonselective denaturing of proteins upon exposure to the nerve, thereby causing nerve injury by precipitating and dehydrating the protoplasm. This, in turn, interferes with
nerve conduction and impairs innervation to muscles. Phenol injections
are typically used to target nerves to large proximal muscles (musculocutaneous, obturator and sciatic nerves), and the duration of clinical effect
may be longer than BoNT. There is limited evidence on the use of phenol in children with CP, but a few small studies show safety and efficacy.
Phenol injection of the anterior branch of the obturator nerve in children
with CP has been found to be safe and effective. AEs include pain, swelling and inflammation, and dysesthesias. The low cost of phenol incurs a
significant advantage over BoNT, but the need for electrical stimulation
or ultrasound guidance and general anesthesia may negate this benefit.

SURGICAL MANAGEMENT

Intrathecal baclofen (ITB) is approved to treat spasticity of cerebral
origin. ITB is delivered to the intrathecal space by a catheter connected
to a sub­fascially implanted pump. This mechanism of delivery produces much higher local concentrations in the cerebrospinal fluid at a
fraction of the equivalent systemic dose of baclofen, thereby minimizing the CNS depressive effects. Catheter tips are typically positioned
at C5-­T2 but can be placed intraventricularly for severe dystonia. ITB
pumps require refills at 2-­6–month intervals depending on dose rate
and pump size and need to be replaced every 5-­7 years for end of battery life. The frequent maintenance required can be prohibitive to some
families. Before ITB pump placement, a single bolus dose of baclofen
can be delivered via lumbar puncture to evaluate responsiveness and
impact on functional abilities. ITB is effective in reducing spasticity
and dystonia in CP and may improve the ease of care and quality of life
of children with CP. Continuous ITB treatment is superior to placebo
on attainment of individual treatment goals in children with Gross
Motor Function Classification System (GMFCS) level IV and V CP
(Fig. 752.1). Serious AEs can occur with ITB. One 14-­year study of 430
patients found at least one complication in 25% of patients: infection in
9.3%, CSF leak in 4.9%, catheter problem in 15.1%, and a pump-­related
problem in 1%. Electromagnetic interference and MRI may cause transient operational changes to the ITB pump and changes to the flow
rate; thus the pump should be interrogated by a programmer after MRI
as a precaution. ITB withdrawal is a medical emergency and needs
to be identified early and managed aggressively. Sequelae can include
high fever, altered mental status, exaggerated rebound spasticity, and
muscle rigidity that, in rare cases, can advance to rhabdomyolysis, multiple organ–system failure, and death. Caregivers need to be educated
on the early symptoms of baclofen withdrawal. Prevention of abrupt
discontinuation of ITB requires careful attention to programming and
monitoring of the infusion system, refill scheduling, and pump alarms.
Selective dorsal rhizotomy (SDR) is a surgical procedure that decreases
muscle spasticity by sectioning hyperexcitatory sensory nerve rootlets that
innervate the lower extremities. The surgical technique involves single or
multilevel osteoplastic laminectomies exposing the L2-­S1 nerve roots,
and sensory rootlets are chosen for sectioning using intraoperative electromyography. The most ideal candidates are thought to be children 3-­8
years of age with spastic diplegic CP, minimal upper limb involvement,
good selective motor control and strength with the ability to rise from
the floor independently, minimal contractures, and good cognitive skills.

GMFCS E & R between 6th and 12th birthday:
Descriptors and illustrations
GMFCS Level I
Children walk at home, school, outdoors and in the
community. They can climb stairs without the use
of a railing. Children perform gross motor skills such
as running and jumping, but speed, balance and
coordination are limited.

GMFCS Level II
Children walk in most settings and climb stairs
holding onto a railing. They may experience difficulty
walking long distances and balancing on uneven
terrain, inclines, in crowded areas or confined spaces.
Children may walk with physical assistance, a handheld mobility device or used wheeled mobility over
long distances. Children have only minimal ability to
perform gross motor skills such as running and jumping.

GMFCS Level III
Children walk using a hand-held mobility device in
most indoor settings. They may climb stairs holding
onto a railing with supervision or assistance. Children
use wheeled mobility when traveling long distances
and may self-propel for shorter distances.

GMFCS Level IV
Children use methods of mobility that require physical
assistance or powered mobility in most settings. They
may walk for short distances at home with physical
assistance or use powered mobility or a body support
walker when positioned. At school, outdoors and in
the community children are transported in a manual
wheelchair or use powered mobility.

GMFCS Level V
Children are transported in a manual wheelchair
in all settings. Children are limited in their ability
to maintain antigravity head and trunk postures and
control leg and arm movements.

Fig. 752.1 Gross Motor Function Classification System Expanded and
Revised (GMFCS E & R). (Descriptors: ©Palisano et al, 1997 – Dev Med
Child Neurol., 39:214-­23 (CanChild: www.canchild.ca); Illustrations Version 2 © Bill Reid, Kate Willoughby, Adrienne Harvey and Kerr Graham,
The Royal Children’s Hospital Melbourne)

Ambulatory children with CP have better function and quality of life in the
24 months after SDR. A prospective gait analysis study in adults with CP
20 years after SDR showed improved locomotor function with increased
gait speed. SDRs are performed to a lesser extent in children with spastic
quadriplegic CP, and goals in this population are often to decrease lower
limb spasticity while improving comfort, care, and positioning. A study in
nonambulatory children with severe CP showed improvements in daily
care and comfort at a mean follow-­up of 19 months after SDR, although
unmasking of prior dystonia can occur. AEs after SDR include bladder or
bowel dysfunction, sensory dysesthesias, and back pain; however, these
occur infrequently and are typically transient. A systematic review of spinal deformities after SDR in children with CP found scoliosis to be the
most common deformity occurring in approximately 30% of children,
but this risk has never been satisfactorily shown to be higher than the risk
in those children who have not undergone SDR. Studies have reported
higher rates of spondylolysis and spondylolisthesis after SDR than would
be expected in the general CP population. Spine radiographs should be
obtained routinely after SDR to monitor for spinal deformity.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 753 u Birth Brachial Plexus Palsy

Chapter 753

Birth Brachial Plexus Palsy
Maureen R. Nelson and Nicholas L. Fleming
Birth brachial plexus palsy (BBPP) may cause significant arm weakness and subsequent functional deficits in children. The nerves to
the arm are affected with variable degrees of weakness and sensory
loss. Most children will have good recovery spontaneously, but
functional deficits will remain in 20–30% of children with BBPP.
The mechanism for BBPP is lateral stretch of the plexus for the vast
majority of cases. Anatomic variations in bones, blood vessels, and tendons lead to a very small number of cases. The incidence of BBPP is
reported as 0.5-­4.6 per 1,000 live births, with variability thought to be
attributable to the type of obstetric care and the size of infants around
the world.
Risk factors for BBPP include prior infants with BBPP, shoulder dystocia, birthweight >4 kg, multiparous mothers, mothers with excessive
weight gain, and diabetic mothers. Delivering twins or triplets, as well
as cesarean sections, have been described as protective from BBPP. Factors with a higher risk of poor outcome are birthweight greater than
4 kg, Horner syndrome, cephalic presentation, and induction or augmentation of labor.
Nerve injuries include neurapraxia, neurotmesis, and axonotmesis. Neurapraxia is the least severe of these types and is a reversible
loss of nerve conduction. This type will recover. Neurotmesis is the
most severe and is a total and complete disruption of the nerve.
An avulsion describes a neurotmesis that is a preganglionic lesion,
and a rupture describes the same event for a postganglionic lesion.
Axonotmesis is the intermediate form and the most difficult to
delineate. There is disruption of the epineurium with variable
injury to the axons creating the diagnostic and prognostic difficulties (Fig. 753.1). For these reasons, it is advisable to urgently seek
out consultation from specialty clinics or specializing physicians in
your geographic area for close monitoring and treatment considerations, including surgical candidacy.
Not only is there variability in the degree of nerve injury, but there is
also variability in location. The brachial plexus consists of the anterior
primary rami, or roots, from C5, C6, C7, C8, and T1. These roots will
combine and then branch to form the trunks, divisions, and branches
before separating distally to individual peripheral nerves as illustrated
by Figure 753.2.

External Sheath

Epineurium
Fascicle
Perineurium

Neurotmesis: Rupture

Neurotmesis: Avulsion

Axonotmesis

Endoneurium
Neuropraxia
Myelin

Axon

Fig. 753.1 Anatomy of peripheral nerve and injury type. (Courtesy
Kendall Hulk, DO.)

4397

There is variable impact on motor and sensory systems as well. The
sensory fibers are relatively protected compared with the motor fibers
because the sensory fibers run together until they are outside of the spinal cord into the dorsal root ganglion, where their cell bodies lie. The
motor fibers have the cell bodies within the spinal cord and so are not
as cohesive in their path. Therefore the sensory fibers may be spared,
while motor fibers show clinical deficits.
Narakas is a commonly used classification system (Table 753.1).
Erb palsy is generally described as the upper trunk or C5-­C6 palsy.
It is by far the most common injury seen in BBPP. When C7 is
included in the injury, it may be referred to as extended Erb palsy.
Together, these forms of Erb palsy make up 75% of all BBPP. These
two groups also demonstrate the greatest recovery rate, at 80% and
60%, respectively, resulting in a functional arm. Klumpke palsy,
C8-­T1, is extremely rare in BBPP, likely not occurring except in the
case of anatomic variation. If a baby presents with a C8-­T1 deficit,
the baby most likely originally had a complete C5-­T1 BBPP and
then had recovery of the upper portion of the plexus. This can happen because C4, C5, C6, and sometimes C7 are protected coming
out from the spinal cord, held in a gutter along the transverse processes by connective tissue, whereas C8 and T1 are not. The phrenic
nerve may also be involved with its innervation from C3, C4, and
C5, with potential respiratory concerns. The differential diagnosis
of an infant with a weak or less functional arm is broad, and there
should be consideration for other neurologic injury (stroke, spinal
cord injury, underlying congenital or metabolic diagnosis), musculoskeletal issues (fracture, muscular torticollis, anomalous rib
impinging nerves), infection, tumor, and other sources of pain or
pathology that could lead to developmental disregard or a learned
non­use of an extremity. Phrenic nerve (4th cervical and C3-C5)
injury may also be present and result in ipsilateral diaphragm paralysis and respiratory distress.

PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

Motor movement evaluation is the focus of this exam. The Active
Movement Scale is a reliable passive assessment of muscle strength
that is widely used for infant examination of BBPP. Mallet scores,
which assess shoulder abduction and external rotation deficits, are
likewise useful but are more pertinent for examination of the toddler or older children. Examination for sensation, particularly sharp
sensation, useful in its own right, will also frequently help with active
motor evaluation in infants. Assessment of muscle stretch reflexes
is important, in that infants with brachial plexus palsy will be areflexive or hyporeflexive in the involved arm. Evaluation of primitive
reflexes, particularly the Moro reflex, is helpful, because most of
these infants will have C5-­C6 involvement, and therefore the Moro
may show shoulder abduction and elbow flexion on one side but not
the involved side. Range-­of-­motion examination is critical. Deficits
are commonly seen because of the imbalance of muscles that are
active and those that are not. Shoulder adduction and internal rotation is a common position, as is elbow flexion, forearm pronation,
and wrist and finger flexion. Torticollis is commonly present and
almost always with the face turned away from the involved arm.
Horner syndrome (ptosis, miosis, and anhidrosis) may be present
ipsilaterally and is an indicator of severity. In children with very
severe deficits, the arm may be cooler because of the sympathetic
nervous system outflow at T1. The size of the involved arm eventually is usually smaller, about 95% of the uninvolved arm, because of
muscle atrophy and smaller diameter and length of the bone.
Among older infants and children, compensatory movements of
the arm may be noted. Common examples are use of trunk momentum to move (particularly to rotate) the proximal arm, hyperlordosis of the lumbar spine to position the arm more advantageously,
use of the pectoralis muscle to flex the shoulder, and use of the knee
while sitting to physically flex the elbow. Examination of the back
for symmetry, along with the scapulae for winging, is also relevant.
Scapular winging can be problematic both socially and clinically.
Having the older child manipulate buttons, snaps, or zippers, throw

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4398 Part XXXI u Rehabilitation Medicine

3 tr

co

al
i n es
m ch
r
Te ran
b

rd

s

u nk

Contribution
from C4
Dorsal
ramus

C5

C6
r
er i o

s

Sup

Lateral pectoral
nerve (C5, 6, 7)

t
La

Musculocutaneous
nerve (C5, 6, 7)

Dorsal scapular
nerve (C5)
To phrenic
nerve

Suprascapular
nerve (C5, 6)
To subclavius
muscle (C5, 6)

s
on s
isi sion
v
i
r d ivi
rio r d
nte terio
a
3 os
3p

3

f
ots
5 ro l rami o )
tra nerves
n
e
v
(
al
spin

er

C7

Mi d

dl e

al

In
s
Po

ter

C8

fe

rio

r

T1

ior
Contribution
from T2
To longus colli
and scalene
muscles
(C5, 6, 7, 8)

1st rib
Axillary
nerve (C5, 6)

Me

Radial nerve
(C5, 6, 7, 8, T1)

dia

l

1st intercostal nerve
Long thoracic
nerve (C5, 6, 7)
Medial pectoral nerve (C8, T1)

Median nerve
(C5, 6, 7, 8, T1)
Ulnar nerve
(C7, 8, T1)

Medial cutaneous nerve of arm (T1)
Medial cutaneous nerve of forearm (C8, T1)
Upper subscapular nerve (C5, 6)

Inconstant contribution

Thoracodorsal (middle subscapular) nerve (C 6 , 7, 8)
Lower subscapular nerve (C5, 6)

Fig. 753.2 Schematic of the brachial
plexus. (Netter illustration from www.nette
rimages.com. Elsevier Inc.)

Table 753.1  Narakas Classification
GROUP

NAME

ROOTS

CLINICAL DESCRIPTION

I

Erb palsy

C5-­6

Paralysis of shoulder and biceps with should abduction, external rotation, and elbow
flexion

II

Extended Erb palsy

C5-­7

As above with paralysis of wrist

III

Total palsy

C5-­8, T1

Complete flaccid paralysis

IV

Total palsy with Horner syndrome

C5-­8, T1

Complete flaccid paralysis with Horner syndrome

and catch a ball, and write, print, or color may be revealing, along
with how they remove their shirt for examination.
When hand function was evaluated with testing of children with
upper-­
plexus involvement, 80% of the children had significantly
decreased performance compared with the contralateral hand. This
indicates the hand function is impaired even in children who only have
upper plexus involvement.

EVALUATION

Radiographic evaluation may be needed. Plain films can be viewed
immediately if there is reason to consider clavicle or humerus fracture, infection, osteomyelitis, or tumor. Ultrasound (US) can be
used to evaluate for shoulder dislocation. CT myelogram had been
the mainstay diagnostic tool for brachial plexus evaluation despite
its radiation dose and invasive lumbar puncture. However, MRI
lacks these drawbacks and provides a more accurate and reliable
evaluation.
US and electrodiagnostic evaluation (EDX) can also be helpful in
evaluation of the brachial plexus. US is an ever-­improving technology but does not yet evaluate the deeper nerve root avulsions or

ruptures, making isolated US imaging inappropriate. However, US
can be useful for postganglionic injury evaluation, specifically for
the upper plexus. EDX may be supplemental and is especially helpful as a confirmatory test for lower plexus avulsion injuries given its
strong specificity and MRI’s weaker diagnostic accuracy for these
lower plexus injuries.
EDX includes both nerve conduction studies (NCS) and electromyography (EMG) and should be performed by someone who
is experienced in the examinations of infants and young children,
both for the most precise evaluation and the most comfortable
experience for the youngster. The following EDX pearls should be
noted:
1.	Normal electrical sensory response in areas where the child cannot
feel indicates a preganglionic neurotmesis (avulsion).
2.	Motor nerve conduction studies are useful to check for continuity of
nerve fibers to muscles that are weak or paralyzed.
3.	F waves are useful in evaluating proximally because these responses
go from peripheral nerves to the spinal cord and back.
4.	Somatosensory evoked potentials are difficult to perform on infants
while awake, because of motor artifact obliterating the responses

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 753 u Birth Brachial Plexus Palsy
with movement, and are imprecise because of overlapping responses
to peripheral stimulation. These are useful intraoperatively because
stimulation can be performed on the nerve roots themselves to determine proximal continuity.
5.	EMG can show activation in muscles with paralysis or severe weakness.
6.	The absence of biceps motor unit potentials at 1 month of age predicts future lack of clinical biceps recovery, although biceps EMG at
3 months has been reported to overestimate recovery potential.

TREATMENT

Early referral or consultation with a specialty clinic or specialized
physician is paramount and should be completed as early as possible or by 1 month of age for close monitoring and consideration
of possible microsurgery. Postoperative improvement in hand and
arm function has been shown to have a negative correlation with
age at time of primary surgery. Infants who do not show satisfactory
improvement in muscle strength are candidates for such primary
surgeries, which may include nerve transfers, in which branches
from an uninvolved nerve are microsurgically transferred to the
distal peripheral nerves supplied by the injured nerve roots and/
or nerve grafting, in which one or more of the nonavulsed roots is
attached distally to the trunk, cord, or peripheral nerve by means
of an autogenous graft (commonly the sural nerve of the leg) or
synthetic nerve conduits. There is general consensus that primary
nerve surgeries should be performed at 3 months of age for Narakas type III and type IV. Those with upper-­plexus (Narakas type I
and type II) involvement are monitored closely, and there is surgical
consideration for primary nerve surgery between 3 and 6 (or even 9)
months of age. Classically, observed elbow flexion less than 3/5 at 6
months of age or a positive “cookie test” (child cannot bring cookie
to mouth without bending neck forward more than 45 degrees) at
9 months would prompt decision to undergo primary surgery in
these populations. The surgical focus for a complete palsy or “flail
arm” is reinnervation of the hand, whereas the surgical goals of an
upper-­plexus reconstruction include, in descending priority, elbow
flexion, glenohumeral abduction, shoulder stability, and shoulder
external rotation. It should be noted that the goals of surgery are
not to regain normal arm function but rather to have a more functional arm.
Regarding primary nerve surgeries, some have reported better
outcomes with nerve transfer rather than nerve graft procedures.
However, the heterogenous nature of BBPP, variable surgical techniques, and available nerve options often dictate what can be performed. Spinal accessory to suprascapular nerve transfer and radial
nerve (long head of triceps branch) to axillary nerve transfer has
been reported as the most common dual nerve transfer procedure.
Other common nerve transfers include median or ulnar nerve to
the musculocutaneous nerve (MCN), medial pectoral nerve to
MCN, intercostal nerve to MCN, and contralateral or cross cervical
nerve root transfers. Nerve graft procedures typically include harvesting of the sural (purely sensory) nerve or using synthetic nerve
grafts. These grafts are typically used to reestablish the conduit of
the suprascapular nerve, graft C5-­to-­posterior division, or graft C3/
C4-­to-­upper trunk.
Regardless of whether primary surgery is pursued, treatment
begins on the initial evaluation with instruction to the parents for
positioning and early stretching exercises to begin at 2 weeks, or
at 3-­4 weeks if a humerus or clavicle fracture is present. They are
also told of the critical task of maintaining infant awareness of the
involved arm, initially by manually mimicking activities with the
affected arm that the baby performs with the contralateral arm and
by using a wrist rattle on the arm. Lack of awareness of the arm,

4399

sometimes called developmental disregard, in children can result in
less active use of the arm, with functional loss, as a consequence.
The parents also are informed of the higher risk of BBPP for future
infants, and so the families are encouraged to speak with the obstetrician about optimal management in future deliveries.
The baby will start with occupational or physical therapy at
approximately 2 weeks of age with focus on maintaining joint
motion, maximizing strength, promoting sensory awareness, and
supporting age-­appropriate development. Parent education should
be reinforced and a home program including daily stretching,
positioning, and strengthening techniques should be constructed.
Therapeutic taping may be done for supination, wrist extension, or,
most commonly, for shoulder positioning to minimize an adducted,
internally rotated posture. Neuromuscular electrical stimulation to
the muscles minimizes atrophy and promotes increased size, and
therefore strength, of muscle fibers. Ideal parameters for its use
have not yet been determined, but a 20-­30–minute twice-­daily program is effective and has been shown to increase bone density.
The therapist or physician may consider a brace or splinting.
Splints can be prescribed in conjunction with a physical or occupational therapist’s guidance and are often worn the majority of the
day (e.g., 22 hours/day). Common splinting strategies include supporting wrist extension with a baby with wrist-­drop and/or extending the fingers and abducting the thumb as well, providing straps to
assist with supination (Sup) of the forearm and even braces focused
on positioning the shoulder in external rotation (ER). Protocols for
splinting strategies such as the “Sup-­ER orthosis” have been created
and studied in small populations; however, there is currently no
general consensus on implementation of such protocols. Early, close
monitoring is not only important for surgical considerations, but it
is also important for monitoring for secondary problems that can
increase the negative impact of functional deficits in children with
BBPP. Contractures of the elbow, shoulder, forearm, wrist, and fingers may occur. Although muscle imbalance and fibrosis can contribute to contracture, the evidence suggests a physiologic response
related to muscle denervation leading to a failure of growth in the
sarcomeres of these affected muscles. Early shoulder dislocations
have been described in severe presentations. Botulinum toxin injections help balance out muscles that are overpowering weak muscles
and such an intervention can minimize contractures and even prevent or help reduce a shoulder dislocation in these severe cases.
For older babies and children, muscle, tendon, and bony procedures are generally performed. These are often called secondary surgeries. Monitoring for shoulder deformity and dislocation
is an important part of long-­term follow-­up. Because the shoulder
joint develops as the infant and toddler grows, deficits frequently
develop. Glenohumeral dysplasia, sometimes with shoulder dislocation, occurs in 60–80% of those with BBPP. Muscular imbalance
across the developing shoulder results in deformity of the skeletally
immature glenohumeral joint. The weakness of shoulder external
rotation, combined with strong internal rotation, leads to this difficulty. The natural history of this deformity is progression if left
untreated. This leads to further functional limitations, even with a
strong hand. Treatment aims to minimize this progression. Treatment options include botulinum toxin injections, arthroscopic or
open anterior capsule release or release of contracture, musculotendinous lengthening, tendon transfers (e.g., latissimus dorsi to
increase external rotation and abduction strength), muscle transfers (e.g., gracilis muscle can be transferred to allow for elbow flexion and/or wrist extension), and, for severe deficits, a derotational
humeral osteotomy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4400 Part XXXI u Rehabilitation Medicine
interventions, mainly prenatal surgical closure of the defect. Prenatal closure decreases the need for a ventricular shunt and lowers
the incidence of severe Arnold-­Chiari malformations, along with
improved motor outcomes. However, there is an increased incidence of preterm delivery and a risk for uterine dehiscence; these
risks may be reduced with fetoscopic procedures.

Chapter 754

Meningomyelocele
­(Spina Bifida)
Pamela E. Wilson and Tess S. Simpson
See also Chapter 631.
Meningomyelocele, or spina bifida (SB), is a congenital neural tube defect that results in the malformation of the spine and a
potential dysplastic spinal cord. The severity of defect ranges from
SB occulta (see Chapter 631.2) upward to anencephaly (see Chapter
631.6). SB without anencephaly is the most prevalent nonchromosomal central nervous system (CNS) defect in the United States.
For unknown reasons, Hispanic women have the highest rate of SB
(3.80/10,000 live births), followed by non-­Hispanic White women
(3.09/10,000 live births); the lowest rate is in non-­Hispanic Black
women (2.73/10,000 live births).

ETIOLOGY

See Chapter 631.1.

PREVENTION

See Chapter 631.1.

PRENATAL SCREENING

Prenatal screening is recommended for all pregnant women to
detect neural tube defects. A blood test is done in the second trimester to evaluate alpha-­fetal protein (AFP). If a neural tube defect
is present, the AFP is often elevated, and further screening using
high-­resolution ultrasound is indicated. Ultrasound may reveal
not only the spinal defect but also abnormal brain development,
suggested by the “lemon and banana signs.” The lemon sign is a
medial indentation and scalloping of the frontal bones in the skull,
whereas the banana sign is associated with hindbrain herniation of
the cerebellum into the foramen magnum. The importance in early
identification allows families to plan for delivery and consider fetal

CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS

Meningomyelocele is a multisystem condition that includes characteristic abnormalities within the CNS. The neurologic lesion is
assessed by the most caudal intact nerve segment with a motor test
of grade 3. Lesions associated with SB are often grouped together
as thoracic, upper lumbar (L1-­L2), midlumbar (L3), lower lumbar
(L4-­L5), and sacral. Based on this information, a clinician can make
inferences on the functional capabilities of the child and answer
pertinent questions during the initial encounters (Table 754.1). The
most basic question all families ask is: “Will my child walk?”
Initial surgical interventions are related to closure of the open
defect. This is generally done the first day of life. Once the back is
closed, the child will be monitored to see if hydrocephalus develops.
Hydrocephalus is very common and related to hindbrain herniation
and obstruction of the fourth ventricle. Hydrocephalus may occur
at any time but most frequently within the first few months. Ventricular dilation may precede a change in head circumference or
signs of increased intracranial pressure. The occurrence of hydrocephalus is approximately 77–95% and does appear to have an association with level of lesion. Treatment of ventriculomegaly, if mild,
may be limited initially to clinical observation. Surgical placement
of a ventricular shunt or endoscopic third ventriculostomy is indicated when occipital frontal circumference (OFC) is increasing.
The risk for shunt revision in the first 2 years is 30–50%, which
then decreases to 10%.
Hindbrain herniation or the Chiari type II malformation is
seen in 80–90% of individuals with meningomyelocele. The classic manifestations include caudal displacement of the cerebellum,
pons, and medulla and elongation of the fourth ventricle. The Chiari II malformation can be symptomatic (from brainstem herniation/compression) in approximately 20% of children. Respiratory
symptoms associated with a Chiari malformation include stridor,
vocal cord dysfunction, and central or obstructive apnea. Swallowing and feeding problems may require gastrostomy tube placement.
If the child has a symptomatic Chiari II malformation, surgical

Table 754.1  Prognosticating in Meningomyelocele
MOTOR LEVEL SPINAL
CORD SEGMENT

CRITICAL MOTOR
FUNCTION PRESENT

MOBILITY: SCHOOL AGE

RANGE: ADULT

ACTIVITY: ADOLESCENT

T12

Totally paralyzed lower limbs

Standing brace, wheelchair

Wheelchair

Wheelchair, no ambulation

L1-­L2

Hip flexor muscles

Crutches, braces, wheelchair

Wheelchair, household
ambulation

Wheelchair, nonfunctional
ambulation

L3-­L4

Quadriceps muscles

Crutches, braces, household
ambulation, wheelchair

Crutches, household
ambulation, wheelchair

50% Wheelchair, household
ambulation with crutches

L5

Medical hamstrings,
anterior tibial muscles

Crutches, braces, community
ambulation

Crutches, community
ambulation

Community ambulation with
crutches

S1

Lateral hamstring and
peroneal muscles

Community ambulation

Community ambulation

Community ambulation 50%
crutch or cane

S2-­S3

Mild loss of intrinsic foot
muscles possible

Normal

Normal

Limited endurance because
of late foot deformities

From Braddon RL, ed. Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2011: Table 54.1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 754 u Meningomyelocele ­(Spina Bifida) 4401
decompression is indicated. All children with SB are at risk for tethered cord syndrome (see Chapter 646.1). After shunt malfunction,
this is the second most common cause for neurologic decline. Clinical manifestations of tethered cord syndrome include any change
in gait, change in bowel or bladder function, increasing scoliosis,
back pain, or orthopedic changes. Surgical detethering procedures
are indicated in those with neurologic decline, but the success rate
is variable.
The orthopedic complications of myelomeningocele are common and have predictable patterns. The spine deformities include
scoliosis, lordosis, and kyphosis (see Chapter 720). The development of scoliosis has an association with the neurologic level. Children with thoracic level meningomyeloceles have an 80–100% risk,
whereas those with a sacral level are at very low risk. Spine deformities tend to increase more rapidly during growth, especially puberty.
Treatment of scoliosis includes both nonsurgical and surgical
options. Braces, such as thoracic-­lumbar-­sacral orthotics (TLSO),
therapy, and proper seating options may be beneficial. Surgically
implanted growing rods to support the developing spine have been
used in younger children. Spine surgery should be considered if the
scoliotic spine curvature reaches 45 degrees; the child who is nearing skeletal maturity is a better candidate for spine surgery. Realistic
expectations need to be discussed with the child and family. Correction of the spine may improve sitting, posture, and pelvic obliquity
but may have a negative impact on function and ambulation.
The development of the hip is also influenced by neurologic level
(see Chapter 719). The risk for dislocation is highest for those with
lesions at the L3 level, followed by L1-­L2. Unilateral hip dislocations
should be fixed surgically because they may result in pelvic obliquity
and problems with sitting, whereas bilateral dislocations generally do
not require interventions. Contractures of soft tissues are commonly
seen in children with higher lesion levels. Hip flexors and knee flexors
are commonly involved.
Abnormalities in the foot occur in approximately 90% of children and adolescents. The goal of treatment is to achieve a plantar grade foot for weight bearing and to allow shoe wear. Clubfoot
deformities are common in babies, and treatment includes serial
casting and orthotics (see Chapter 715.3). The results are often suboptimal, and surgery may be needed. In addition, congenital vertical talus (rocker-­bottom feet) is often encountered and needs to be
addressed (see Chapter 715.4).
Osteoporosis (see Chapter 749) begins to develop in childhood
and is more severe in higher-­level meningomyelocele. Fractures of
the lower extremities are most common in the femur, followed by the
tibia. Preventive treatment includes nutritional approaches such as the
use of supplemental calcium and vitamin D. Those with documented
fractures should undergo a diagnostic evaluation (see Table 749.1),
including dual-­
energy x-­
ray absorptiometry (DEXA). The use of
bisphosphonates may be considered if the diagnostic evaluation does
not reveal other underlying causes. The utility of early weight bearing has been advocated, but passive standing may have little impact on
bone density.
Neurogenic bladder and bowel can be anticipated. The goals of
treatment interventions are to protect kidney function and achieve
social continence. For continence of urine, clean intermittent catheterization (CIC) is the mainstay of management. It is not atypical
for newborn babies to be started on a CIC program. Urodynamics
and renal ultrasounds are routinely used to monitor for hydronephrosis and track intravesicular pressures. Medications may be used
to reduce bladder contractions and improve volume capacity. Surgical techniques are being used to improve continence, including

bladder augmentation, urethral surgeries, and catheterizable channels. Poor CIC technique and/or urinary reflux may lead to urinary
tract infection (UTI), which is diagnosed by having two findings: a
urinalysis with white cell count of >10 and urinary culture >100,000
cfu/mL. A multicomponent bowel program is generally needed to
achieve bowel continence. Nonsurgical interventions include adequate hydration, dietary manipulation, fiber regulation, and use of
laxatives and enemas. Surgical interventions, such as the antegrade
continence enema (ACE), have improved continence in many children and adolescents with SB.
Latex allergies are common. The etiology is likely multifactorial,
but increased early exposure may play a role in the development of
severe reactions (see Chapter 190). Care providers need to be keenly
aware of products that contain latex or that have a cross reactivity,
such as foods mixed with avocado, bananas, or kiwi fruit. Radioallergosorbent testing is used for identification of potential severe
allergens.
People with SB show a wide range of neuropsychologic abilities. Many show a complex neuropsychologic profile that includes
strengths in some areas and weaknesses in other areas. Common
areas of strengths include vocabulary, word reading, spelling, and
certain types of memory. Common weaknesses include motor skills,
attention, organization, math, reading comprehension, and executive functioning skills. Overall cognitive functioning typically falls
within the average range for children with SB; however, neurologic
factors such as a Chiari II malformation or the presence of hydrocephalus increase the risk for neuropsychologic challenges. Neuropsychologic assessment is recommended to identify any potential
gaps in cognition and social or emotional skills. This assessment
can provide helpful information related to a child or adolescent’s
education and employment needs and assist with development of an
individualized educational plan (IEP) or vocational rehabilitation
plan. Appropriate early intervention and support programs should
be initiated through an IEP or 504 plan if indicated (see Chapter
56). Effective interventions both at school and the home should be
structured, explicit, and individualized. Parents and teachers can
support learning goals by progressing in an orderly fashion from
one learning target to the next and by modeling how to approach
problems or tasks, often with step-­by-­step instructions and supervised practice.

ADOLESCENCE AND TRANSITION TO ADULTHOOD

Improved and expanded clinical care has increased the life span
of individuals with SB, with the majority of individuals now living
well into adulthood. Secondary conditions associated with SB (e.g.,
UTIs, skin breakdown, learning challenges) and more difficulty
accessing healthcare services compared with their age-­
matched
peers make adolescents and young adults with SB less likely to
achieve emerging adult milestones such as leaving home, attending
college, or finding employment.
The primary care clinician, in conjunction with specialty services,
plays a pivotal role in developing future planning. It is important to
discuss early on strategies to encourage developmentally appropriate
independence and self-­management skills. Individualized, comprehensive transition care that includes care coordination, decision-­making
support, education and employment resources, and independent living
support is recommended for providers caring for children and adolescents with SB.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4402 Part XXXI u Rehabilitation Medicine

Chapter 755

Upper and Lower
Extremity Assistive
Devices
Abigail Case and Sarah Helen Evans
Assistive devices, such as orthoses, prostheses, walkers, crutches, and
wheelchairs, are key components of intervention for individuals with
physical disabilities, and with the continued advancement in technology, robotic forms of these devices are also important to consider. The
type of device chosen depends on the underlying diagnosis, functional
abilities of the individual, prognosis for functional improvement or
decline, tone abnormalities, range of motion, strength, and the overall
gait pattern. Physicians, licensed independent practitioners, and physical therapists perform the evaluation of a child requiring an assistive
device.

ORTHOSES

An orthosis is a device that is applied to the surface of the body to
maintain alignment or position, to prevent or assist movement of the
body part, or to provide support. Named for the body parts covered,
orthoses can be static, made of rigid material, and designed to immobilize joints to inhibit movement, or they can be dynamic, allowing
movement of the limb to occur. For example, AFO stands for ankle-­foot
orthosis, a brace worn on the foot that extends from the toes to the midcalf position, supporting the foot and ankle joints (Fig. 755.1). Prefabricated orthoses are available, but many children require custom-­made
orthoses for optimal fit. Orthoses are modified or replaced during
periods of growth or changes in function and can be obtained either
directly through the orthotist or through the child’s physical therapist.
In most of the United States, braces must be prescribed by a physician
or licensed independent practitioner to obtain insurance coverage, and
it is best practice to have a prescription.
The use of an upper limb orthosis can be more conspicuous than
its lower limb counterparts, and physicians should analyze the user’s
psychosocial well-­being and tolerance for such device. In addition to

patient goals and outcomes, the therapeutic intent of the upper limb
orthosis must be considered. The efficacy of the orthosis may be measured by the reduction of the effects of the three Ps: paralysis, pain, and
position.
The type of lower-­extremity orthosis prescribed is based on the
child’s diagnosis, functional status, prognosis, and the goals of treatment, with the prescription frequently modified over time as the child
changes. Before writing a prescription, the provider performs an examination, which may include an evaluation of the child’s gait, strength,
tone, and range of motion. There are many types of braces that have
specific functions to improve gait. Table 755.1 lists examples of these
orthoses and their potential uses.
The most prescribed braces are solid and articulated AFOs. Solid
AFOs are used for children with hypertonicity because they help to
biomechanically reduce tone and provide stability with standing and
walking. Children who are nonambulatory also benefit from wearing
solid AFOs to maintain range of motion of the ankle.
Articulated (hinged) AFOs allow the child to have ankle dorsiflexion
by permitting forward movement of the tibia and supporting the foot
for heel strike. This design makes ambulating on uneven surfaces and
using stairs easier because of the movement allowed at the ankle, while
still supporting the foot position and maintaining medial-­lateral stability of the ankle. Articulated AFOs should not be used in children with
cerebral palsy, spina bifida, or other disorders if they have a crouched
gait pattern because the hinge in the ankle joint may allow further
crouching. In crouched gait, the hips and knees are held in flexion and
ankles in dorsiflexion throughout the gait cycle, leading to an inefficient gait pattern.

PROSTHESES

A prosthesis is a device that replaces a missing body part, such as an
arm or a leg. Lower-­extremity prostheses are used to improve mobility,
but upper-­limb prostheses are not always needed to improve function
because children can be quite independent with a single upper limb.
Children with congenital upper limb amputations or deficiencies need
to have prosthetic devices fit at the time they begin to sit for them to use
the prosthesis functionally, and because, developmentally, young children are not ready to learn to use complicated devices, teaching them
to use a mechanical prothesis requires intensive occupational therapy.
Myoelectric protheses are too heavy and too hard to use at this age.
Children with acquired upper limb amputations may be more likely to
adjust to the use of a prosthetic arm.
Lower-­limb prostheses are used in children with acquired amputations as a result of trauma or cancer and also in congenital transverse
amputations or for those who have undergone surgical correction, as
often occurs with longitudinal fibular deficiency or proximal femoral
focal deficiency.
There are multiple components to lower-­limb prostheses, which
include the socket and foot, but may also include a hip and knee joint,
depending on the level of amputation. A prosthetist works with the
child and family to fabricate the prosthesis. A physician or licensed
independent practitioner with experience in prostheses provides the
prescription for this device.
The type of prosthesis depends on the age of the child, the level of the
amputation, and the status of the residual limb. In very young children,
use of a lower-­extremity prosthesis follows developmental milestones,
with the first prosthesis prescribed at the time the child should be
pulling to stand. Addition of joints to the prosthesis also occurs when
developmentally appropriate, such as use of a knee joint around the age
of 3 years when the child is learning to use stairs.
Advances in technology are helping children who use prostheses
achieve a fluid gait pattern that makes their prosthetic use virtually
undetectable to the untrained eye. New components and designs allow
amputees to lead active lifestyles that may include running, swimming,
biking, and mountain climbing.

ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES
Fig. 755.1 Hinged ankle-­foot orthosis. (Courtesy Ultraflex Systems,
Inc., Pottstown, PA.)

The function of assistive mobility devices is to provide a wider base of
support to improve stability during ambulation, reduce the possibility

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 755 u Upper and Lower Extremity Assistive Devices

4403

Table 755.1  Orthotic Options
ORTHOSIS

FUNCTION

COMMENTS

Neoprene thumb abductor

Places thumb in abduction to promote functional use
of hand

Will not overcome severe cortical thumb position

Thumb spica

Immobilizes and protects the thumb and provides a
stable post against which the index finger can pinch

Need to allow for full metacarpophalangeal (MCP)
flexion of the fingers

Resting hand

Preserves balance between extrinsic and intrinsic
musculature and provides joint stability; prevents
contracture

Pressure at the MCP joint or proximal phalanx should
be avoided because it can injure the MCP joint. This
splint is to be used for positioning, not function

Wrist cock-­up

Supports, immobilizes, or stabilizes wrist in extension,
which allows for mechanical advantage in grasp

Must maintain full MCP flexion and thumb motion

Elbow extension

Increases extensor end range of motion (ROM)

Not for severe flexor tone with contracture or
fluctuating tone; in that case, use a drop out cast or
splint

Gunslinger

Supports shoulder girdle and prevents subluxation

Make sure the edges of splint are not cutting into hip
area; check in standing and supine

Myomo

Sensor-­activated, power-­driven upper limb orthosis
can train the arm and hand while providing
assistance with bimanual activities

Heavy
Minimal growth with a child

Foot orthosis (FO)

Provides support of foot only to keep ankle in subtalar
neutral

Not typically customized but can be with a UCBL*

Supramalleolar orthosis (SMO)

Provides medial-­lateral support of foot to prevent
excessive pronation, supination, or instability

Appropriate for children with low tone such as in
Down syndrome. Also useful for young children with
equinovarus posture or mediolateral instability

Ankle-­foot orthosis (AFO)

Provides support at the ankle and reduces foot drop
or plantarflexion tone by keeping the ankle in a
neutral position

Commonly used for ambulatory and nonambulatory
children
Assists with dorsiflexion and inhibits plantarflexion.
Requires rocker bottom shoe for rollover in gait

FES activated AFO

Uses functional electrical stimulation to assist
dorsiflexion at the appropriate time in the gait cycle

Cannot inhibit plantarflexion
Less restrictive than a solid or hinged AFO
Can be used with an SMO to provide mediolateral
stability at the ankle

Ground reaction ankle-­foot
orthosis (GRAFO)

Provides knee extension moment to reduce crouching
or collapsing into dorsiflexion during standing or
walking

Appropriate for children with spina bifida or who have
weakness in the plantar flexors who crouch when
walking

Knee-­ankle-­foot orthosis
(KAFO)

Provides support at the knee when there is quadriceps Less commonly used because of large size of brace
weakness to promote an upright posture with
but may be appropriate for child with spina bifida or
standing or walking
spinal cord injury

Walking assistance exoskeleton

Bionic robot for use in paraplegic patients

Heavy. Very expensive. Does not grow with a patient.
Cannot be used in patients with spared sensation in
the legs

*UCBL – University of California Berkley Laboratories, where this maximum control foot orthosis was developed.

of falls, and improve efficiency of gait. The least supportive device is
a traditional single-­point cane commonly used after an orthopedic
injury. For most children with gait abnormalities secondary to neurologic disorders, this is not a functional option because a cane does not
provide enough stability. More supportive gait aids, such as forearm
(Lofstrand) crutches, are appropriate in children with neurologic disorders; however, use of these devices requires good coordination and
strength. Children with cerebral palsy and spina bifida may benefit
from these devices.
Walkers provide more support than crutches and canes; they do not
require as much strength and coordination to operate. Children with
cerebral palsy, for example, may use a reverse walker, which they pull
behind them. This reverse configuration provides a wide base of support and stability, helps maintain an erect posture, and allows the child
to engage with the environment without the barrier of the walker in
front of them. Having the walker behind them also reduces the risk for
more serious injury from a forward fall.
For children who require a significant amount of support because
of poor head and trunk control, gait trainers are often used. These

devices allow the child to work on leg movements while the trunk and
pelvis are stabilized (Fig. 755.2). Although gait trainers provide a child
with moderate to severe motor impairments upright supportive mobility, “gait trainer” is a misnomer in that it is not intended to train a child
to walk independently.

WHEELCHAIR

Wheelchairs should be considered as a means of mobility when
ambulation is not possible or is difficult outside of the home setting.
Children with spinal cord injuries, spina bifida, neuromuscular diseases, or cerebral palsy may benefit from the use of a wheelchair. The
goal is to provide a wheelchair that will allow the child to move independently about the environment, including home, school, and the
community. Children as young as age 2 years can self-­propel a manual
wheelchair and operate a power wheelchair. The type of wheelchair
prescribed will depend on the child’s underlying diagnosis, cognition,
vision, motor skills (such as head and trunk control), strength and
endurance of upper limbs, musculoskeletal deformities, if present,
and medical comorbidities. One must also consider future growth or

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4404 Part XXXI u Rehabilitation Medicine
from the user’s neuromuscular system while bionic limbs respond to
sensors implanted in the brain. The use of robotic assistive devices is
less common than mechanical devices, in part because of availability
and in part because of higher cost. The advantage of most robotic assistive devices compared with their mechanical counterparts is the ability
of the device to train the user to need it less while providing the assistance required in the moment.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 756

Health and Wellness for
Children with Disabilities
Meghan A. Klawonn, David M. Kanter, and
Margaret A. Turk
DISABILITY
Children with Special Healthcare Needs
Fig. 755.2 Gait trainer. (Photo copyright 2013 by Rifton Equipment,
http://www.rifton.com.)

anticipated changes in function over time, as well as the family’s ability to transport the chair. An important consideration when ordering
a pediatric wheelchair is the adjustability to accommodate growth.
A typical wheelchair may last 3-­5 years with periodic adjustments to
growth by a seating specialist. There are many components that can
be added to provide more support in the wheelchair, including head
rests, lateral trunk support, hip guides, antitippers that prevent the
wheelchair from tipping backward, and specialized tires. The seating
system is considered a separate item from the wheelchair itself and
is, in fact, a seating orthosis. It should be properly fit for the child’s
current size and seating needs. The function of a seating system is to
promote the upright positioning of the head and trunk as well as control of the position of the legs, especially the hips, in sitting. Children
with good trunk control will require a simple seat back, while a child
with poor trunk control, such as someone with a high cervical spinal
cord injury, will require a system that includes a head rest and lateral
thoracic supports. The seat itself must be customized to provide a
stable base on which the trunk can align. Restraint at the pelvis, such
as a seatbelt or bar, helps maintain proper positioning in the chair.
Specialized cushions are needed for those with decreased sensation
to prevent pressure-­related skin sores.

ROBOTIC DEVICES

Rehabilitation robotics is a subspecialty field that is helping to increase
independence for individuals with disabilities. Robots are currently
defined as machines programmable by a computer and capable of carrying out a complex series of activities automatically. Although there
is a wide range of the types of robots used in rehabilitation, a subset of
robots provide assistance in the form of adaptive equipment. Most of
these robots are wearable; notable exceptions are fully automated voice-­
controlled feeding systems and speech generating devices. Lower limb
devices are designed to help a child progress toward a typical gait pattern and range in complexity from exoskeletons to programable AFOs
that provide electrical stimulation to muscles that control foot position
and strength across the ankle joint. Upper limb devices are designed to
increase the use of a minimally functional arm and hand. Programmable prostheses, such as myoelectric arms and hands, respond to input

The expansion of the disability definition to include children with special healthcare needs (CSHCN), chronic conditions, and activity limitations from any cause (e.g., limitations in usual daily activities such as
age-­appropriate self-­care, mobility, communication, and cognition) has
made the health issues of the more traditional childhood disability types
(e.g., cerebral palsy, intellectual disability, spina bifida, congenital musculoskeletal disorders) more difficult to identify. U.S. data note continued
increasing prevalence of developmental disabilities and identify developmental, emotional, and behavioral conditions as the leading conditions.
Physical health conditions comprise a smaller proportion of disabilities,
although mobility and motor control issues may be noted among the
aforementioned developmental, behavioral, and emotional conditions.
These disabilities contribute to continued economic and health problems
into adulthood. Childhood and adolescent health promotion interventions can decrease functional impairment across the life span. Monitoring children with disabilities throughout their development is essential
for identifying times when support to children, adolescents, and/or their
families is needed to promote positive health outcomes.

Health Promotion Definitions and Background for
Disability

The World Health Organization (WHO) defines health promotion as
“the process of enabling people to increase control over, and to improve,
their health.” For people with disabilities, this concept is important
because they are both underserved and have comparatively large health
disparities. The WHO further defines health promotion approaches as
including more than health education and consisting of community
action, supportive and accessible environments, policy changes, health
service modifications, and development of personal skills. Health and
wellness programs also include traditional preventive management
strategies, such as anticipatory guidance. There is ample evidence that
engaging in specific areas of health promotion results in improvement,
although the evidence for its influence on adult health is less robust.
Children with disabilities encounter many barriers to healthy behaviors (Table 756.1). Both broad and focused health promotion programs
consider severity of condition, barriers and resources, and self-­efficacy to
achieve health-­promoting behaviors. Children with disabilities may also
require modeling or assistance to apply healthy behaviors to their particular disability or economic, social, and environmental circumstances.
Individuals with disabilities and their families often view health differently than those without disabilities. Disability may influence health and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 756 u Health and Wellness for Children with Disabilities

4405

Table 756.1  Barriers and Facilitators for Children to Engage in Healthy Behaviors
SELF

FAMILY

INSTITUTION

BARRIERS

BARRIERS

BARRIERS

1.	Lack of knowledge and
skills
2.	Fear of injury or failure
3.	Personal choices
4.	Fatigue
5.	Lack of initiative
6.	Limited functional
capability

1.	Negative attitudes
by parents, peers,
healthcare providers
2.	Limited parental healthy
behaviors
3.	Stress in the close family
network
4.	Economic restrictions

1.	Inaccessible facilities or
resources
2.	Needing adult or aide
assistance
3.	Policies and procedures
of facilities or programs
4.	Noninclusive providers
5.	Transport challenges

FACILITATORS

FACILITATORS

FACILITATORS

1.	Education or knowledge
about heathy behaviors
2.	Engaging child in
discussions and
decisions
3.	Desire to be active
4.	Making activities a
part of the routine—
repetition and
consistency promote
ongoing activities

1.	Promotion of activities
by rehabilitation and
other healthcare
professionals
2.	Family support and
participation
3.	Involvement of friends
and peers in activities
4.	Models or directions
for participation with
adaptions
5.	Creative and
knowledgeable
professionals

1.	Accessible facilities
and opportunities with
knowledgeable staff
2.	Policies and resources
promoting participation
3.	Welcoming and
inclusive providers:
Adaptable approaches

vice versa, but their perception of their own health and wellness does not
equate with their level of disability. Experiences as a child with a disability often foreshadow adult behaviors, especially negative attitudes toward
therapy, exercise, and activity. Beliefs of parents, families, and healthcare
providers also influence the views of health by children with disabilities.
Health promotion programs for these children must (1) understand and
support the role and well-­being of parents, (2) recognize that parents of
children with more functional limitations may require more resources
and support, (3) involve children with disabilities in the design of programs and decisions about participation, and (4) address barriers to participation, perceived and real (see Table 756.1).
An effective health and wellness program should involve multiple
approaches and opportunities for success by considering novel and
inclusive approaches, including partnerships with families, school staff,
and rehabilitation providers. Effectiveness requires addressing any mismatch between the child’s positive sense of health and well-­being and
that expected by the healthcare providers; recognizing limitations of an
education-­only model; engaging the child in discussions about the importance of healthy behaviors, ways to engage in healthy behaviors related to
the child’s disability and circumstances, and decisions about participation; promoting self-­efficacy and self-­management of health and wellness
in preparation for adult healthcare when possible; and parent and family
involvement coupled with sensitivity for the high level of support a family
may already be providing for a child with a disability.

Anticipatory Guidance, Counseling, and
Preventive Care

Preventive healthcare through health education, anticipatory guidance,
and participation in screening and immunization schedules is the mainstay of pediatric public health programs (see Chapter 12). Bright Futures,
developed by the American Academy of Pediatrics and their collaborators and supported by the Maternal and Child Health Bureau, Health
Resources, and Services Administration, provides a knowledge base for
pediatric healthcare providers and the public about anticipatory guidance,
health promotion, and prevention for children and adolescents with a section in the 4th edition titled “Promoting Health for Children and Youth
with Special Health Care Needs.” For the general population, 25% of parents receive no information, and <50% receive all recommended guidance.

Although parents of CSHCNs report similar or better receipt of general
preventive information, it is not clear whether those with higher severity
of functional limitations receive this guidance or counseling, and whether
it is provided in the context of disability and other circumstances.
CSHCNs require typical prevention, as well as more specific counseling or screening related to their disability. Some of this more specific counseling can be managed by specialty care providers, although
CSHCNs often have difficulty obtaining appropriate specialty outpatient services. Additional barriers to care, especially with increasing
age of the child, are the lack of accessible medical equipment and
facilities. Planning for transitions to adult care should begin early,
with consideration of environmental access, preparedness for self-­
management when possible, and knowledge and skills of local healthcare providers. Although discussions of health risks with adolescents
about smoking, drinking, and protected sexual activity should be
undertaken, the discussions may require a different focus for adolescents with disabilities. Higher violence and abuse rates toward
children with disabilities are reported, for which providers must be
vigilant. Internet and social media use increases the risk of bullying
and other negative experiences. It appears adolescent females with
disabilities are more vulnerable than males to this victimization.
The recommendation is to recognize the need for modifications
to typical guidance and to be alert for any signs of emotional disturbances. CSHCNs experience family issues with separation/divorce,
mental health and substance abuse problems, incarceration, domestic or neighborhood violence, discrimination, parental death, and
maltreatment more than those without special needs. Counseling
should be broadened to include questions and discussions about
conditions associated with the specific disabilities (e.g., epilepsy
or cognitive impairments often seen with cerebral palsy, or neurogenic bladder and bowel in spinal cord dysfunction) or secondary
conditions, such as pain, osteoporosis/fractures, or the fatigue seen
in many CSHCNs. Early recognition of emotional and psychiatric
disorders, at early ages and especially during times of transition,
can help to address nationally acknowledged unmet mental healthcare needs. There are also signs of comorbidities commonly seen in
adulthood, such as cardiovascular and renal conditions, in children
with disability.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4406 Part XXXI u Rehabilitation Medicine
Physical Activity and Exercise

National health guidelines recommend at least 60 minutes of physical
activity daily for children, but any activity increase from sedentary
levels to even moderate activity (30-­40 minutes of moderate intensity or 20 minutes of more strenuous activity) provides some health
benefit. Health professionals should give specific advice about how
children with disabilities can increase their level of activity. Exercise
and activity increase aerobic capacity, functional ability, and quality
of life for children with many kinds of disabilities and chronic diseases. National 24-hour movement guidelines have been established
in Canada and Australia, with age-specific recommendations regarding lengths of time to sleep, perform physical activity, and sedentary
time. It has been shown that individuals with disabilities meet the
24-hour movement guidelines at lower rates compared to the general population, which in turn may affect mental health. And yet,
many healthcare providers and families accept sedentary lifestyles for
children and adolescents with disabilities, whatever their functional
abilities. Video gaming systems that involve movement can help to
overcome this lack of activity because they can provide another way
to increase movement. For children with disabilities, school physical
education and recess programs can support activities at or greater
than the recommendation, and school requirements can reinforce
activity expectations; however, there should be monitoring for possible negative affect, poor sense of belonging, and presence of victimization during open recess opportunities. School-based interventions
for adolescents with intellectual and developmental disabilities have
been shown to increase healthy behaviors, such as engagement in
physical activity and increased consumption of fruit and vegetables.

Healthy behaviors are in turn associated with improvement in mental health. The need for exercise beyond physical therapy should
be clarified to help children understand the benefits and purpose
of both. The activities in which youth with disabilities wish to participate can be supported, and shared decision-­making should be
invoked. Children with disabilities who participate in physical activities report social benefits, such as developing friendships, building a
support system, gaining knowledge of self, and acquiring a sense of
accomplishment. These factors also contribute to higher adherence to
activities. Children with disabilities may also be more likely to participate in physical activities when those activities are supervised and
organized, as opposed to free play in an open room. For children with
disabilities to engage in physical activity in supported environments,
school and public playgrounds must be made sufficiently accessible
to support community physical activity. A number of agencies have
endorsed the Commit to Inclusion campaign to promote building
healthy, inclusive communities for people of all ages with disability
(e.g., the President’s Council on Fitness, Sports, and Nutrition, along
with the National Center on Health, Physical Activity, and Disability;
the American Association on Health and Disability; and the Center
on Disability at the Public Health Institute).
Physical activity for children and adolescents improves
fitness and quality of life for youth with developmental disabilities
(Table 756.2). These exercise and fitness programs require 2-­3
months of participation, at least twice a week, to achieve any
changes, and many of the changes achieved are longer lasting than
expected. These programs are not traditional therapy, and participation in therapy is not a substitute. These focused fitness and

Table 756.2  Examples of Effective Exercise Programs for Children with Disabilities
CENTER-­BASED
FITNESS PROGRAM
AND HOME PROGRAM

ONLINE EXERCISE
PRESCRIPTION TOOL

GROUP AQUATIC AEROBICS

GROUP TRAINING CLASS

• Children with a variety of
disabilities
• Group exercise: 2×/wk for
14 wk, warm-­up, aerobics,
strengthening, cool-­down
• Home program: 2×/wk for 12
wk using video exercises
• Outcomes: improved walking
efficiency, strength, general
functiona

• Children with a variety of
disabilities, 50% able to walk
2×/wk
• Recreation to achieve
target heart rate; aquatic
strengthening program
• Outcomes: improved walk/runb

• Children with cerebral palsy
able to walk 2×/wk for 14 wk
• Warm-­up, circuit training
stations (treadmill, balance
stairs, closed-­chain exercises)
• Outcomes: improved muscle
strength, mobility, functionc

• Children with a variety of
disabilities
• 8 wk home exercise program
delivered using Physitrack, an
online exercise prescription tool
• Outcomes: equivalent
adherence to traditional paper-­
based method, more easily
accessibled,e

• Strength
• Training

• Walking-­jogging program

• Treadmill training program

• Skill-­related fitness (SRF)

• Children with cerebral palsy
including a majority able to
walk with assistive devices 3×/
wk for 6 wk
• Progressive training program,
conducted in the home
• Outcomes: improved
perceptions of strength,
walking, stair management,
improved psychologic benefitsf

• Children with down syndrome
• 3×/wk for 10 wk, 30 min
sessions, achieving 65–70%
peak heart rate
• Outcomes: improved peak
exercise time and grade,
improved walking capacityg

• Children with intellectual
disabilities daily for 2 months
• Progressive treadmill use with
goal of 20-­30 min
• Outcomes: improved heart rate
with and without activitiesh

• Adolescents with intellectual
disabilities
• SRF is a physical fitness
component related to sports
performance, used to enhance
participation with peers in
leisure activities
• Outcomes: positive exercise
training effects on agility, power
RT, and speedi

aFrom Fragala-­Pinkham MA, Haley SM, Rabin J, Kharasch VS. A fitness program for children with disabilities. Phys Ther. 2005;85(11):1182–1200.
bFrom Fragala-­Pinkham M, Haley SM, O’Neil ME. Group aquatic aerobic exercise for children with disabilities. Dev Med Child Neurol 2008;50(11):822–827.
cFrom Blundell SW, Shepherd RB, Dean CM, Adams RD, Cahill BM. Functional strength training in cerebral palsy: A pilot study of a group circuit training class for children age 4-­8

years. Clin Rehabil 2003;17(1):48–57.
dFrom Johnson RW, Williams SA, Gucciardi DF, Bear N, Gibson N. Can an online exercise prescription tool improve adherence to home exercise programmes in children with

cerebral palsy and other neurodevelopmental disabilities? A randomised controlled trial. BMJ Open. 2020;10(12):e040108.
eFrom Johnson RW, Williams SA, Gucciardi DF, Bear N, Gibson N. Evaluating the effectiveness of home exercise programmes using an online exercise prescription tool in children

with cerebral palsy: protocol for a randomised controlled trial. BMJ Open. 2018;8(1):e018316.
fFrom McBurney H, Taylor NF, Dodd KJ, Graham HK. A qualitative analysis of the benefits of strength training for young people with cerebral palsy. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2003;45(10):658–663.
gFrom Millar AL, Fernhall B, Burkett LN. Effects of aerobic training in adolescents with Down syndrome. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1993;25(2):270–274.
hFrom Lotan M, Isakov E, Kessel S, Merrick J. Physical fitness and functional ability of children with intellectual disability: effects of a short-­term daily treadmill intervention. Sci World

J 2004;4:449–457.
iFrom Jeng SC, Chang C-­W, Liu W-­Y, Hou Y-­J, Lin Y-­H. Exercise training on skill-­related physical fitness in adolescents with intellectual disability: A systematic review and meta-­

analysis. Disabil Health J. 2017;10(2):198–206.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 756 u Health and Wellness for Children with Disabilities
exercise programs generally require the support and direction of
rehabilitation professionals, although programs can be community
based in nonmedical surroundings.
Recreation and organized sports are other areas where children and
adolescents with disabilities can engage successfully, at times with modifications. Participation improves cardiopulmonary parameters, motor
function, social competence, and general sense of well-­being. Many
children with disabilities require 1-­on-­1 instruction for development of
skills, with a goal of participation in activities with their peers. Perceived
barriers to participation in sports differ based on the source: children
were concerned about dependency; parents required more information
about possible sport participation. Programs through Special Olympics
International are an opportunity for children and adolescents to engage
in supportive and monitored environments for sport and recreation.
Rehabilitation professionals can assist with problem-­solving activity
participation, such as by using computerized technologies for “exergaming” (e.g., Wii, Xbox, PlayStation), developing individual or group challenges with mobile devices (e.g., activity trackers), adapting equipment
(e.g., modified upper-­limb prosthesis to allow baseball glove use or modified bicycle equipment), and knowing of adapted recreation programs in
the area (e.g., horseback riding, winter/water sports). Technologies that
allow for exercise as part of gaming provide new opportunities for moderate to vigorous exercise in people with disabilities, especially in those
with limited use of the lower limbs. Youth with greater functional limitations may not be able to achieve moderate to vigorous exercise, but even
light intensity exercise may be enough to give them some health benefits.
“Exergaming” programs are viewed as more fun than traditional exercises, which may increase likelihood of participation.

Sleep and Pain

Poor sleep quality or the presence of pain will have an impact on physical
activity and general performance in children and youth with disabilities.
Regular inquiry about sleep and pain is important because of the higher
prevalence of problems in these areas in children with disabilities. Common sleep disturbances include difficulty initiating sleep, frequent sleep
disruptions, and reduced sleep duration. Causes are often complex and
multifactorial, with some associations with disability type (e.g., obstructive sleep apnea with Down or Prader-­Willi syndromes, disrupted sleep
patterns with autism, negative bedtime behaviors with attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder, pain as trigger with cerebral palsy) and comorbidities (e.g., epilepsy, gastroesophageal reflux). Frontline approaches are sleep
hygiene and behavioral interventions, and further evaluation may be warranted for targeted interventions (see Chapter 31).
Pain has been described as a cause for behavioral changes, poor sleep,
activity interference, and change in school performance in children
with a variety of disabilities. Children with cerebral palsy have been
most closely studied, with high prevalence of both acute and chronic
pain. Routine screening is important for early identification and evaluation for cause, and interventions should be tailored to address the biopsychosocial model of pain management.

Nutrition and Obesity

See also Chapter 65.
Managing the combination of nutrition and physical activity is the
key ingredient of weight control. Estimates suggest that children with
physical activity limitations were twice as likely as the general population to be overweight, and youth with cognitive impairments are at
increased risk. It is unclear if obesity is a cause for the activity limitations or is a result of the limited activity, which may be an important
distinction in developing interventions. The concern with obesity
contrasts with early life weight gain needs of many children with
disabilities, and it may be confusing for parents and families when
the focus changes to weight decrease. Confounding factors related
to monitoring percent body fat in children with disability include
(1) the propensity for some disabilities, often those that are genetically mediated, to be associated with obesity; (2) standards of measurement may not be appropriate for certain diagnoses or disability
types (e.g., inaccurate weight [limb deficiencies/amputation, scale
inaccessibility], inaccurate height [unable to stand, contractures],

4407

no standards related to short stature or muscle wasting); (3) obesity
may be a side effect of medication, and this effect must be balanced
against the drug benefits (e.g., antipsychotics, steroids); and (4) the
social network of family, friends, schools, and healthcare providers
may unwittingly negatively influence health habits, including use of
food as reward for behavior management. Both children and their
parents should be a part of the conversations related to obesity or any
weight-­related topic. Information must be presented in a direct and
understandable way and modified for the child’s and parents’ needs.
Discussion of promoting health through nutrition and physical activity, while problem solving challenges to participation, may be a better
approach than explaining body composition and metabolic pathways.

Emotional Health and Leisure Activities

Emotional health is often overlooked in children with disabilities.
Youth and adolescents with disabilities appear to be at higher risk for
feeling low, stressed, or anxious (especially those with higher levels of
limitations), and those with mental health needs may have lower adaptive functioning or a family history of mental illness. While children
and young adults diagnosed with autism have received much attention related to emotional support needs, there are increasing reports
of this need with most childhood-­onset disability conditions, including at ages before teenage years. Sexuality, gender identity, and other
sex-­related issues can also be reasons for emotional turmoil. Adolescents with physical disabilities participate in fewer social activities,
have fewer close or intimate friends, and have fewer plans for ongoing
education. There is a risk for continued isolation into adulthood. Passive social media use may exacerbate this problem. Novel programs
to improve self-­concept and build resilience based on psychoeducational therapy principles, typically developed through interdisciplinary
teams, and involving peer groups, parents, and family members, have
been shown to successfully promote positive outcomes. Medications
may be considered, but effectiveness is not guaranteed, and unwanted
side effects may produce more health challenges. Counseling requires
insurance support or discretionary funding. There is some early work
on using apps to try and help track mental health issues.
Leisure and recreational activities provide social supports, additional
stress-­coping mechanisms, and ability to develop social skills and a
stronger personal identity. Although the negative aspects of social media
are often discussed, there are also positive aspects. Adolescents with disabilities may more easily communicate and socialize with peers online,
improving their mental well-­being. Females with disabilities tend to
engage in social or skill-­based activities, and males in physical activities,
with decreasing participation with increasing age. In general, encouraging socialization through leisure activities, recreation, or sports and
physical activity can be a part of counseling in a routine health visit.

Dental Care

Dental care is a frequently unmet healthcare need for children with disabilities, especially for those in low-­income families or with more severe
impairments. The principal deficits are in receipt of specific dental care
(not preventive services). Condition severity may also predict the degree
to which parents are interested in oral health–related education and actually engage in oral health efforts. Parents and caregivers play a critical role
in oral health support. Challenging behaviors often limit dental care, and
the use of behavior management techniques and education programs have
been effective in allowing dental care. Dental treatment under anesthesia
may be necessary to provide effective oral healthcare.

Role of Healthcare Providers

Primary care and other healthcare providers should be mindful of
discussing and promoting health and healthy behaviors with children and adolescents with disabilities and their families (Table 756.3).
Initial discussions and preventive screening, including exploration
for early signs of cardiovascular or renal diseases and assessing the
need for emotional support, are a responsibility of primary care providers individually or in conjunction with specialty care providers.
Children with a wide range of impairments should be included in
multi-method inclusive research. Innovative strategies for engaging

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4408 Part XXXI u Rehabilitation Medicine
Table 756.3  Targeting Healthy Behaviors for Children with Disabilities
GENERAL PREVENTION

PHYSICAL ACTIVITY

NUTRITION AND OBESITY

• Recognize risks for less healthy behaviors
and facilitators of behavior changes and
participation.
• Cover typical topics for all children counsel
regarding disability or situation context.
• Specifically monitor for abuse and violence.
• Provide typical age-­appropriate adolescent
information about smoking, drinking,
substance abuse, sexual contacts; refer if
unable to provide.
• Monitor for disability-­specific health
conditions; many require referral.

• Promote exercise and activity with an
expectation for activity.
• Ensure that family and child/adolescent are
knowledgeable about benefits and possible
adaption.
• Review need for possible dietary changes.
• Consider referral to community programs
and/or rehabilitation professionals

• Recognize obesity can cause limitations and
can be the result of poor dietary habits and
limited activity.
• Follow percent body fat in a consistent way,
recognizing the need for accurate measures
or limitations of measures (e.g., weight,
body mass index [BMI], skinfold thickness,
other traditional measures) in many
disability conditions.
• Ensure that family and child/adolescent are
knowledgeable about healthy nutrition.
• Consider referral to nutritionist or other
professional to engage patient and
family in education and behavior change
counseling
• Review need for increased activity level with
dietary intervention.

EMOTIONAL

HEALTH, RECREATION, AND LEISURE

DENTAL

• Question for sense of anxiety/feeling low,
stress management and ability to adapt,
and social supports.
• Consider medications and counseling
based on expected effect, monitor effects/
side effects; consider referral, making
sure that insurance/payment coverage is
available.
• Consider recreation and leisure activities
to promote social support and ability to
develop social skills.
• Recommend use of social media in positive
ways to enhance connections.

• Question about social activities outside
the home: highlight the importance of
developing social skills, sense of self, and
support networks
• Consider referral to community programs or
rehabilitation professionals.
• Consider recommending online support
groups, social groups.

• Discuss more than preventive dental care.
• Suggest behavior strategies if there are
problems engaging in dental appointments
and refer for this service as needed.

children with disabilities have been identified and offer much hope
for the future. Parents are more likely to positively engage with a referral to healthcare professionals with expertise in providing a more tailored approach to health promotion after initial advice and support.
Strategizing with parents about accessible environments or opportunities can promote inclusive community opportunities for participation. Providers should be willing to discuss intimate relationships and

sex-­related issues at appropriate times as they do with youth without
disabilities—and refer when unable to meet those needs. Family-­
centered and coordinated care, commonly found in medical homes,
can support healthy behaviors and emergency planning for unforeseen events.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Environmental Health
Chapter 757

Overview of
Environmental Health
and Children
Ruth A. Etzel
GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGE

Pediatricians’ primary goal is prevention. One dominant prevention challenge of the 21st century is the climate crisis. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change concluded that the Earth is
undergoing adverse global climate change and that anthropogenic
(human-­made) contributions are significant. These climate changes
are creating conditions that have already affected public health,
with disproportionate impacts on certain life stages, including children. Children are especially vulnerable to the impacts of climate
change because their bodies are growing and developing, they have
unique behaviors and interactions with their environment, and they
must rely on parents or caregivers to provide for their basic needs.
Climate change affects children’s health as a result of their exposure
to elevated temperatures; more frequent, severe, or longer-­lasting
extreme weather events; transmission rates of food-­borne, water-­
borne, and vector-­borne diseases; increases in air pollution from
molds, pollens, and the burning of fossil fuels; and mental health
stressors (Fig. 757.1). Natural disasters such as floods and hurricanes, damp housing, and mycotoxin-­related illnesses are worsening as temperatures and sea levels rise. The impacts are being felt
most among young children and those who are living in poverty.
The need to reduce carbon dioxide in the environment has compelled many countries to sign the Paris Agreement. This agreement
promises to keep the global temperature rise well below 2°C above
preindustrial levels, and to try to limit the temperature increase to
1.5°C. Even though the Paris Agreement began in 2016, its promises have not been kept and the temperature is already 1.2°C higher
than in the preindustrial era. Individual actions are another necessary step in carbon dioxide reduction. Parents and caregivers can
work to reduce their family’s burning of fossil fuels. They also can
protect children’s health by checking the air quality index and pollen counts and considering a limit to children’s outdoor play time if
levels are high. Parents can watch for signs of dehydration or overheating in their children and can prevent tick and mosquito bites
by using insect repellent and protective clothing. Pediatricians and
those who care for children can be highly effective advocates for an
urgent governmental response to the climate crisis by speaking out
at the community, national, and international level.

LOCALIZED ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARDS

Localized exposures to a wide variety of chemical, biologic, and
physical agents can also harm children. Numerous epidemics of disease from chemical, biologic, and physical agents (both natural and
human-­made) over the past 80 years have documented a variety of
adverse outcomes among children (Table 757.1). Some epidemics,
such as those caused by the nighttime release of methyl isocyanate

PART

XXXII

from a factory in Bhopal, India, the nuclear meltdown in Chernobyl, and the melamine contamination of infant formula in China,
received widespread attention and heightened the awareness of parents and pediatricians about hazards in the environment. For many
people, the word epidemic conjures up images of hospital isolation
wards, poor sanitation, and rapidly spreading infectious diseases.
Epidemics of environmental origin often have served to elucidate
new hazards for children. Many of the routinely used chemicals
understood to be toxic to children were initially identified when a
cluster of children was exposed and developed symptoms during a
relatively short period of time. Unfortunately, the children served
as the “canaries in the coal mine” to indicate that specific chemicals (including thallium, mercury, arsenic, and lead) contained in
products for children such as diaper rinses, teething powders, and
depilatory agents, posed a threat to their health. The comparison of
children to canaries is apt: following underground mine explosions,
canaries were used by miners throughout recent history to help
detect elevated levels of carbon monoxide gas. Canaries were useful
“carbon monoxide detectors” because of their rapid breathing rate
and high metabolism, making them more sensitive to the effects of
gases, including carbon monoxide. Likewise, young children have
a rapid breathing rate and a high metabolic rate and may be more
sensitive than adults to chemicals in the environment.
Table 757.1 summarizes major incidents of environmental poisoning that affected children. The characteristics of environmental
exposure and the age and developmental stage of the child affect
the likelihood of developing health problems. After the release of
methyl isocyanate (used in the production of some pesticides) at
Bhopal in 1984, an estimated 200,000 children living near the Bhopal chemical plant were affected by the gas release (see Table 757.1).
Methyl isocyanate gas is 1.4 times heavier than air; thus higher
concentrations of the gas were found near the ground or floor.
Because of their short stature, children’s breathing zones are closer
to the ground or floor than adults’ breathing zones; therefore children likely inhaled higher concentrations of the toxic gas. Children
exposed to the same levels of methyl isocyanate as adults may have
received larger doses because they have relatively greater lung surface area to body weight ratios and higher minute volume to weight
ratios. Based on each of the poisoning events listed in Table 757.1,
additional precautions were taken to avoid children’s unnecessary
exposure to the specific product or chemical implicated.
Although major poisonings such as those listed in Table 757.1
have caused substantial morbidity and mortality among children,
environmental health hazards may also result in more subtle effects
that may not manifest until later in life. In addition to the exposures
received during large outbreaks, children receive smaller doses of
chemicals on an almost daily basis through the water they drink,
the food they eat, and the air they breathe. Because of their unique
vulnerability, they may exhibit symptoms from these exposures earlier than do adults.

TOXINS VERSUS TOXICANTS

A toxin is a poisonous substance produced naturally by a living organism (e.g., aflatoxin). A toxicant is a poisonous substance made by
humans or introduced into the environment by human activity (e.g.,
dioxins). Synthetic chemicals are referred to as toxicants.

MYCOTOXINS

Children’s exposures to mycotoxins, the toxins produced by certain fungi on grains, nuts, and other crops, will likely increase as the

4409
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4410 Part XXXII u Environmental Health

Environmental Change

Climate Change

Ecological Change

Fig. 757.1 The relationship between environmental

change, climate change, ecologic change, and child
health. (Adapted from Bunyavanich S, Landrigan CP,
McMichael AJ, et al. The impact of climate change on
child health. Ambul Pediatr. 2003;3:44–52. Fig. 2.)

Air Pollution

•
•

Cough
Asthma

UV Radiation

•
•
•

Sunburn
Malignant Melanoma
Immunosuppression

Thermal Pollution

•

Heat Stroke

Weather Disasters

•
•
•
•

Psychosocial Trauma
Drowning
Dehydration
Gastrointestinal

Food Availability

•
•
•

Malnutrition
Growth Retardation
Developmental Delay

Allergen/Mycotoxin

•
•
•

Allergies
Cancer
Birth Defects

Infectious Disease
Exposure

•
•
•
•

Malaria
Dengue
Encephalitis
Lyme Disease

Emerging Infect.
Disease

•
•
•

West Nile Disease
Hantavirus
Zika Virus

Table 757.1  Epidemics of Environmental Disease Affecting Children
VEHICLE

DATE

COUNTRY

APPROX. #
SICKENED

Thallium

Depilatory agents

1930

Grenada

16

Thallotoxicosis

13

Methylmercury

Fish and shellfish

1956

Japan

2,265

Cerebral palsy

1,784

Arsenic

Contaminated milk powder

1955

Japan

11,778

Fever, diarrhea darkened
skin, swollen abdomen

113

Hexachlorobenzene

In human milk after
pregnant women ate
HCB-­treated seed grain

1957

Turkey

∼200

Pembe yara (pink sore) rash,
weakness convulsions

<2 yr ∼200

Methyl isocyanate

Leak from chemical plant

1984

India

<15 yr:
200,000

Coughing, eye irritation
choking death

All ages
2,500-­5,000

Dioxin

Chemical plant explosion

1976

Italy

193 (88%)

Chloracne

0

Radiation

Chernobyl

1986

Ukraine

<18 yr: 4,000

Thyroid cancer

∼8

Radiation

Scrapped medical machine
stolen from hospital

1987

Goiânia,
Brazil

249

Acute radiation syndrome

4 (1 child)

Fungi

Water-damaged homes

1990s

Ohio, US

30

Pulmonary hemorrhage

5

Aflatoxin

Grain

2004

Kenya

317

Aflatoxicosis

125

Melamine

Infant formula

2008

China

290,000

Kidney stones

6

Lead

Small-­scale gold mining

2010

Nigeria

>2,000

Seizures, death

200

CONTAMINANT

climate changes because their production is influenced by temperature, humidity, and rainfall. Exposure to mycotoxins results in different
health outcomes dependent on the route of exposure. Exposure from
eating or drinking may lead to gastrointestinal illness, tremors, and
cancer in adulthood; exposure via breathing may result in acute respiratory illness during infancy. There also is emerging evidence linking

ILLNESS

APPROX. #
WHO DIED

mycotoxin exposures among children, especially those in developing
countries, to stunted growth.

Pediatric Conditions Linked to Mycotoxin Exposures

Exposures to mycotoxins have been linked to at least two conditions that
affect children: neural tube defects and acute pulmonary hemorrhage.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 757 u Overview of Environmental Health and Children

4411

Neural Tube Defects

years, Stachybotrys and other toxigenic fungi including Trichoderma
have been associated with acute pulmonary hemorrhage among
infants in other areas of the United States, Canada, and New Zealand.
The rapidly growing lungs of infants are especially vulnerable to the
effects of the trichothecene mycotoxins produced by Stachybotrys and
Trichoderma.

Infant Pulmonary Hemorrhage

FOOD-­BORNE DISEASES CAUSED BY
ENVIRONMENTAL EXPOSURES

Studies of an epidemic of birth defects in 1990 in south Texas suggested an association between maternal ingestion during pregnancy
of high levels of fumonisin, universally present in corn and in corn-­
based products, and birth defects such as anencephaly and spina bifida.
Fumonisins are known to interfere with cellular folate uptake.
Several studies of a 1994 epidemic of acute pulmonary hemorrhage
in Cleveland, Ohio, documented a novel association between life-­
threatening pulmonary hemorrhage and the presence of the toxigenic
mold Stachybotrys in the water-­damaged homes in which the infants
were living. Stachybotrys produces mycotoxins that are lipid soluble
and readily absorbed by the airways, as well as a hemolysin and several proteinases that can degrade vascular collagen. In subsequent

Contamination of food with viruses and bacteria is a major cause of
childhood food-­borne diseases (see Chapter 387), and children are also
at risk from a variety of noninfectious food-­borne hazards in the environment, which include natural hazards such as mycotoxins and synthetic persistent organic pollutants such as dioxins (see Chapter 759;
Table 757.2).

Table 757.2  Food-­Borne Illnesses (Noninfectious)
INCUBATION
PERIOD

SIGNS AND
SYMPTOMS

DURATION
OF ILLNESS

ASSOCIATED
FOODS

Antimony

5 min to 8 hr
usually <1 hr

Vomiting, metallic taste

Usually self-­
limited

Metallic container

Identification
of metal in
beverage or
food

Supportive care

Arsenic

Few hours

Vomiting, colic,
diarrhea

Several days

Contaminated
food

Urine; may cause
eosinophilia

Gastric lavage BAL
(dimercaprol)

Cadmium

5 min to 8 hr
usually <1 hr

Nausea, vomiting,
myalgia, increase in
salivation, stomach
pain

Usually self-­
limited

Seafood, oysters,
clams, lobster,
grains, peanuts

Identification of
metal in food

Supportive care

Ciguatera fish
poisoning (ciguatera
toxin)

2-­6 hr

GI: abdominal pain,
nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea

Days to
weeks to
months

3 hr

Neurologic:
paresthesias, reversal
of hot and cold, pain,
weakness

A variety of
large reef
fish, grouper,
red snapper,
amberjack, and
barracuda (most
common)

Radioassay for
toxin in fish or
a consistent
history

Supportive care,
IV mannitol;
children more
vulnerable

2-­5 days

Cardiovascular:
bradycardia,
hypotension,
increase in T-­wave
abnormalities

Copper

5 min to 8 hr
usually <1 hr

Nausea, vomiting, blue
or green vomitus

Usually self-­
limited

Metallic container

Identification
of metal in
beverage or
food

Supportive care

Mercury

1 wk or longer

Numbness, weakness
of legs, spastic
paralysis, impaired
vision, blindness,
coma
Pregnant women
and developing
fetuses are especially
vulnerable

May be
protracted

Fish exposed to
organic mercury,
grains treated
with mercury
fungicides

Analysis of blood,
hair

Supportive care

Vomiting, diarrhea,
confusion, visual
disturbance,
salivation,
diaphoresis,
hallucinations,
disulfiram-­like
reaction

Self-­limited

Wild mushrooms
(cooking may
not destroy
these toxins)

Typical syndrome
and mushroom
identified or
demonstration
of the toxin

Supportive care

ETIOLOGY

Mushroom toxins,
<2 hr
short-­acting
(museinol,
muscarine,
psilocybin, coprius
artemetaris, ibotenic
acid)

LABORATORY
TESTING

TREATMENT

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4412 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
Table 757.2  Food-­Borne Illnesses (Noninfectious)—cont’d
ETIOLOGY

INCUBATION
PERIOD

Mushroom toxin,
long-­acting
(amanitin)

4-­8 hr diarrhea;
24-­48 hr liver
failure

Diarrhea, abdominal
cramps, leading to
hepatic and renal
failure

Often fatal

Mushrooms

Typical syndrome
and mushroom
identified and/or
demonstration
of the toxin

Supportive care,
life-­threatening,
may need life
support

Nitrite poisoning

1-­2 hr

Nausea, vomiting,
cyanosis, headache,
dizziness, weakness,
loss of consciousness,
chocolate brown–
colored blood

Usually self-­
limited

Cured meals, any
contaminated
foods, spinach
exposed to
excessive
nitrification

Analysis of food,
blood

Supportive care,
methylene blue

Pesticides
(organophosphates
or carbamates)

Few minutes to Nausea, vomiting,
few hours
abdominal cramps,
diarrhea, headache,
nervousness, blurred
vision, twitching,
convulsions,
salivation, and
meiosis

Usually self-­
limited

Any contaminated
food

Analysis of food,
blood

Atropine: 2-­PAM
(pralidoxime)
is used when
atropine is not
able to control
symptoms and is
rarely necessary
in carbamate
poisoning

Puffer fish
(tetrodotoxin)

<30 min

Paresthesias, vomiting,
diarrhea, abdominal
pain, ascending
paralysis, respiratory
failure

Death usually
in 4-­6 hr

Puffer fish

Detection of
tetrodotoxin in
fish

Life-­threatening,
may need
respiratory
support

Scombroid (histamine) 1 min to 3 hr

Flushing, rash, burning
sensation of skin,
mouth, and throat,
dizziness, urticaria,
paresthesias

3-­6 hr

Fish: bluefin,
tuna, skipjack,
mackerel, marlin,
escolar, and
mahi mahi

Demonstration
of histamine in
food or clinical
diagnosis

Supportive care,
antihistamines

Shellfish toxins
(diarrheic,
neurotoxic, amnesic)

Diarrheic
shellfish
poisoning
(DSP)—
30 min to 2 hr

Nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, and
abdominal pain
accompanied by
chills, headache, and
fever

Hours to 2-­3
days

Detection of
the toxin in
shellfish; high-­
pressure liquid
chromatography

Supportive care,
generally self-­
limiting

Neurotoxic
shellfish
poisoning
(NSP)—few
minutes to
hours

Tingling and numbness
of lips, tongue, and
throat, muscular
aches, dizziness,
reversal of the
sensations of hot and
cold, diarrhea, and
vomiting

A variety of
shellfish,
primarily
mussels, oysters,
scallops, and
shellfish from
the Florida coast
and the Gulf of
Mexico

Amnesic
shellfish
poisoning
(ASP)—
24-­48 hr

Vomiting, diarrhea,
abdominal pain
and neurologic
problems such as
confusion, memory
loss, disorientation,
seizure, coma

30 min to 3 hr

Diarrhea, nausea,
vomiting leading
to paresthesias
of mouth, lips,
weakness, dysphasia,
dysphonia, respiratory
paralysis

Days

Scallops, mussels,
clams, cockles

Detection of toxin
in food or water
where fish are
located; high-­
pressure liquid
chromatography

Life-­threatening,
may need
respiratory
support

Shellfish toxins
(paralytic shellfish
poisoning)

SIGNS AND
SYMPTOMS

DURATION
OF ILLNESS

ASSOCIATED
FOODS

LABORATORY
TESTING

TREATMENT

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 758 u Biologic Effects of Ionizing Radiation on Children

4413

Table 757.2  Food-­Borne Illnesses (Noninfectious)—cont’d
INCUBATION
PERIOD

SIGNS AND
SYMPTOMS

DURATION
OF ILLNESS

ASSOCIATED
FOODS

LABORATORY
TESTING

Sodium fluoride

Few minutes
to 2 hr

Salty or soapy taste,
numbness of mouth,
vomiting, diarrhea,
dilated pupils,
spasms, pallor, shock,
collapse

Usually
self-­limited

Dry foods (e.g.,
dry milk, flour,
baking powder,
cake mixes)
contaminated
with sodium
fluoride–
containing
insecticides and
rodenticides

Testing of vomitus
or gastric
washings,
analysis of food

Supportive care

Thallium

Few hours

Nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, painful
paresthesias, motor
polyneuropathy, hair
loss

Several days

Contaminated
foods

Urine, hair

Supportive care

Tin

5 min to 8 hr,
usually <1 hr

Nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea

Usually
self-­limited

Metallic container

Analysis of food

Supportive care

Vomitoxin

Few minutes
to 3 hr

Nausea, headache,
abdominal pain,
vomiting

Usually
self-­limited

Grains such as
wheat, corn,
barley

Analysis of food

Supportive care

Zinc

Few hours

Stomach cramps,
nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, myalgias

Usually
self-­limited

Metallic container

Analysis of food,
blood, and
feces, saliva, or
urine

Supportive care

ETIOLOGY

TREATMENT

BAL, Bronchoalveolar lavage; GI, gastrointestinal; IV, intravenous.
Adapted from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Diagnosis and management of foodborne illnesses: a primer for physicians and other health care professionals. MMWR.
2004;53(No. RR-­4):1–33.

Aflatoxins

Aflatoxins are poisonous substances that are formed as a result of mold
growth on peanuts, corn, figs, oil-­seeds, tobacco, and other products.
The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) has classified aflatoxin B1 as a group I carcinogen (known to be carcinogenic
to humans). Ingestion of elevated levels of aflatoxin also can result in
acute aflatoxicosis, characterized by vomiting, abdominal pain, hepatitis, and sometimes death.

started vomiting after they ate wheat products that contained vomitoxin and other mycotoxins. For infants, the estimated tolerable
daily intake is 1.5 μg/kg body weight. A suspected epidemic of
vomitoxin-­related illness that affected about 1,700 school children
in the United States in 1997-98 was linked to burritos that had measurable levels of vomitoxin of 0.3 parts per million (ppm; the advisory level set by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for adults
is 1 ppm).

Ochratoxin A

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

The mycotoxin ochratoxin A, produced by many different species of
Aspergillus molds, is toxic to the kidneys. Ochratoxin A contaminates
many foods, including barley, rye, and other cereals, cereal-­derived
foods, dry fruits, beans, cocoa, coffee, beer, wine, poultry, eggs, pork,
and milk. Ochratoxin A is teratogenic, immunotoxic, genotoxic, and
mutagenic. The IARC has indicated that ochratoxin is a possible
human carcinogen (category 2B).

Chapter 758

Fumonisins are mycotoxins that may contaminate cornmeal and
cereals. The fumonisins are known to interfere with sphingolipid
metabolism. Consuming foods contaminated with fumonisins during pregnancy has been linked to an increased risk of having a child
with a neural tube defect and an increased risk of esophageal cancer
in adulthood.

Biologic Effects of
Ionizing Radiation on
Children

Deoxynivalenol

Samuel L. Brady and Donald P. Frush

Fumonisins

This mycotoxin, often called vomitoxin because its predominant
effect is vomiting, can be present in foods made from wheat and
corn. Even after the grain is baked or cooked, vomitoxin retains
its toxicity. Multiple epidemics of vomiting illness that occurred
in China during 1961 to 1985 were associated with ingesting grain
contaminated with vomitoxin. In India in 1987, almost 100 people

DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING, RADIATION THERAPY

Ionizing radiation is produced when energy is absorbed within an
atom such that a bound electron is liberated, and the atom becomes
ionized. Exposure to ionizing radiation is characterized by three

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4414 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
categories: (1) absorbed dose, (2) equivalent dose, and (3) effective dose. In terms of radiation interaction with humans, absorbed
dose is defined as the energy imparted (i.e., absorbed) within a
mass of tissue from a radiation source. Absorbed dose is calculated
based on the attenuation properties of the irradiated tissue (e.g.,
attenuation is greater in bony tissue due to its higher electron density and mass than water equivalent, soft tissue organs). The units
of absorbed dose, as defined by the International Commission of
Radiation Units, are the Gray (Gy), the preferred unit, and the older
radiation absorbed dose (rad). There are different types of radiation
including x-­ray, γ-­ray, α particles (helium nucleus stripped of all
electrons), β particles (unbound electrons), neutrons, and protons.
Not all radiation has the same effect on biologic tissue for a given
absorbed dose; for example, β particles are quite superficial, protons
deposit most of their energy deeper within the body, and α particles and neutrons cause significantly more damage than x-­rays or
γ-­rays. Diagnostic imaging uses x-­rays and γ-­rays. The therapeutic
use of radiation for cancer treatment primarily uses x-­rays, β particles, and protons depending on their application and location of
disease within the body. Equivalent dose is a term used to define
the relative effectiveness to cause biologic damage. The International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP) gives x-­rays,
γ-­rays, and β particles a relative weighting of 1, protons a weighting of 2, neutrons a weighting of 2.5-­20 (neutron weighting factor
depends on the energy of the neutron), and α particles a weighting
of 20. Thus, for the same level of radiation exposure to an organ,
the equivalent dose, i.e., the relative level of biologic damage, would
be higher for absorbed doses from protons compared with x-­rays.
Effective dose is a term that represents “the sum of the weighted
[applying organ and tissue weighting factors] equivalent doses for
the radiosensitive tissues and organs of the body” (National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements). A list of relative
organ and tissue weighting factors defined by the ICRP is provided
in Table 758.1. Equivalent dose and effective dose are measured in
units of sievert (Sv), with levels in diagnostic imaging typically in
millisieverts (mSv), and the rem (older unit) (Table 758.2). Effective dose is not applied as a metric of dose to an individual but is
a population average. Effective dose is not adjusted based on real
or potential radiation susceptibilities for tissues for either gender
or age.
Nuclear medicine and PET imaging examinations are described by
the amount of radioactivity given, commonly injected intravenously.
Administered radioactivity is referred to as the administered radiopharmaceutical dose, commonly defined in millicuries (mCi) or megabecquerels (MBq). Radiopharmaceutical dose may be converted to
Table 758.1  Tissue Radiosensitive Weighting Factors;
ICRP Report 103
TISSUE WEIGHTING ∑
wT
TISSUE
FACTOR (W )
T

Red bone marrow, colon,
lung, stomach, breast,
remainder tissues*

0.12

0.72

Gonads

0.08

0.08

Bladder, esophagus, liver,
thyroid

0.04

0.16

Bone surface, brain, salivary
glands, skin

0.01

0.04

Total

1.00

*Remainder tissues: Adrenal glands, extrathoracic region, gallbladder, heart, kidneys,
lymphatic nodes, muscle, oral mucosa, pancreas, prostate, small intestine, spleen,
thymus, uterus/cervix

effective dose by applying correction factors provided in ICRP reports
53, 80, 106, and 128.
For the average adult, ionizing radiation exposure occurs from
both natural (60%) and medical (40%) sources, and for the average
pediatric-­age individual, ionizing radiation exposure occurs primarily from natural sources (91%) as compared to medical sources
(9%) (National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements). Radon gas accounts for the majority of natural radiation
exposure. For the adult population, the percentage contribution
from medical imaging to the total ionizing radiation exposure had
been increasing in the late 20th and early 21st century, but is now
declining since 2006. As of 2016, for the average adult, CT imaging comprised 63% of the total of ionizing radiation procedures
(Fig. 758.1A), but medical imaging accounted for only 42% of the
average adult population exposure to ionizing radiation; this has
decreased slightly in the past decade due to technologic advances in
imaging equipment and how we use the equipment in practice. For
the pediatric patient population, CT remains the primary source of
medical radiation exposure, accounting for 84% of the total medical
exposure (annual per capita exposure) from ionizing radiation (see
Fig. 758.1B). Despite efforts to educate the medical community and
the public on radiation safety and the guiding principle of keeping radiation dosing “as low as reasonably achievable (ALARA),”
understanding of sources, amounts, and potential risks of ionizing radiation can still be limited. Some imaging procedures do
not produce ionizing radiation (Table 758.3), and not all ionizing
radiation-­producing modalities expose a child to the same amount
of radiation (Table 758.4). To facilitate choosing the appropriate
imaging modality for a patient’s clinical indications, American
College of Radiology appropriateness criteria have been published
(https://www.acr.org/Clinical-­R esources/ACR-­Appropriateness-­
Criteria) to assist referring physicians in making the most appropriate imaging or treatment decision for a specific clinical condition.

BIOLOGIC EFFECTS OF RADIATION

Biologic effects of radiation are divided into tissue reactions (previously known as deterministic effects) and stochastic effects. Tissue reactions do not occur below a threshold absorbed dose, and
severity is directly related to the magnitude once the threshold is
exceeded. No evidence of tissue reactions has been demonstrated
from radiation dose levels typical of diagnostic imaging examinations (i.e., <100 mGy), but complicated interventional procedures
have on rare occasions led to these effects. Typical tissue reactions
can present as temporary hair loss (epilation) and skin reddening
(erythema), which occur in regions of peak dose of >2 Gy (Table
758.5). Cataracts have been reported to occur with acute exposure
of >0.5 Gy.
The second type of biologic effect is the stochastic effects that
are of concern because they are assumed to potentially occur at any
dose; that is, there is no threshold. Stochastic effects are most commonly discussed as cancer risk but also include heritable effects.
The probability of a stochastic effect increases with rising level of
absorbed dose, but not the severity. Cancer, if radiation induced,
is not more severe with higher doses. It is generally accepted by
the scientific and medical community that stochastic effects may
be caused by any level of radiation striking vulnerable tissue (most
importantly DNA, but cytoplasm also may be at risk) and causing
irreversible damage. The most widely accepted model representing
stochastic effects is the linear no (dose) threshold (LNT) model.
This model maintains that any level of radiation dose has a potential risk, although this risk is currently uncertain at effective dose
levels below 50-­100 mSv. Greater than this range, there is a recognized, although very small, statistically significant risk of a stochastic effect. In the LNT model, no level of radiation exposure is
assumed to be safe.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 758 u Biologic Effects of Ionizing Radiation on Children

4415

Table 758.2  Radiation Measurements
UNITS

RADIOACTIVITY

ABSORBED DOSE

EFFECTIVE DOSE

EXPOSURE

Common units

Curie (Ci)

rad

rem

Roentgen (R)

SI units*

Becquerel (Bq)

Gray (Gy)

Sievert (Sv)

Coulombs/kg

CONVERSION EQUIVALENTS
1 millicurie (mCi) = 37 megabecquerels (MBq)
100 rad = 1 Gy (1 rad = 1 cGy)
100 rem = 1 Sv (1 rem = 10 mSv)
Background radiation dose is approximately 10 μGy/day (1 millirad/day)
*SI units: International System of Units.

Radiation can cause permanent cell injury leading to carcinogenesis, genetic variants, or cell death. The biologic effects of radiation result primarily from damage to DNA. Direct effect reactions
occur mainly through interactions of high linear energy transfer
(LET) particles, such as α particles or neutrons, directly with the
DNA structure. A similar mechanism also can occur with x-­ray or
γ-­ray photons by directly liberating an electron from atoms (called
a recoil electron) near the DNA structure. The kinetic energy of the
recoil electron or high LET particles may directly cleave chemical
bonds in the DNA structure.
An indirect effect is caused by the formation of free radicals.
This is the more common mechanism with x-­rays and γ-­rays used
in medical imaging. Approximately 80% of the cell is water, so most
of the energy deposited in a cell results in the production of aqueous free radicals. This occurs when the absorbed x-­ray or γ-­ray photon energy is converted to recoil electrons that create ion radicals
(H2O+ and H2O−). The ion radicals promptly decay (10−18 to 10−3
seconds) into free radical species (OH−, H+, H3O+). Approximately
two thirds of DNA damage is believed to be caused by this indirect
effect through creation of hydroxyl (OH−) free radicals, which then
primarily reacts with DNA by attaching to the hydrogen bound to
the deoxyribose carbon resulting in a base release from the DNA
structure and strand break of the DNA helix. The biochemical
changes that follow either direct or indirect effects take hours or
days to manifest, whereas the physiologic changes leading to the
likely complex cascade of a variety of factors for cancer induction
may take years to decades to manifest.
The results from DNA injury are variable. The cell containing the
damaged DNA almost always repairs itself and continues as a viable
cell for miotic division. In some instances, the cell might die; one
form of cell death is called apoptosis, which is a common pathway
to eliminate heavily damaged and potentially mutable cells. Damage
to a single base pair from radiation exposure is the most prevalent
and least significant effect. Ninety percent of single-­strand DNA
breaks are repaired within an hour by naturally occurring DNA
repair processes; therefore they usually have little biologic significance because each strand is repaired with use of the opposite
strand as a template. Though less likely, a pathogenic variant can
result from single-­strand break repair if inaccurate repairs occur;
however, large regions of the DNA genome on somatic cells are not
active or do not have genes that are expressed. Inaccurate repair in
these regions of the genome lead to minimal biologic effect and are
sufficient to produce viable cells.
Breakage of both strands of DNA (i.e., double-­strand break) is
the least common event, but more problematic. The ultimate outcome for cell viability depends on the proximity of the break in each
strand. If widely separated (greater than 10 base pairs), which is
essentially two remote single-­strand breaks, repairs occur rather
seamlessly. If the breaks in the two strands are opposite or near each
other (separated by less than 10 base pairs), repair is more difficult
as there is no reciprocal base pair to serve as a “memory” template.
Radiation-­induced double-­stranded breaks generally lead to cell
death or chromosomal misrepair, potentially leading to pathogenic gene variants that may result in carcinogenesis.

Noncardiac interventional
fluoroscopy, 6 %
Computed
tomography, 63 %

Cardiac interventional
fluoroscopy, 6 %
Radiography and
fluoroscopy, 10 %

Nuclear medicine,
15 %

A
Fluoroscopy, 3 %

Nuclear medicine, 3 %

Interventional
(including cardiac), 4 %
Radiography, 6 %

CT, 84 %

B
Fig. 758.1 Percentage radiation exposure by diagnostic imaging
modality for (A) adult and (B) pediatric populations. (Adapted with
permission of the National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements, Report 184: Medical Radiation Exposure of Patients in the
United States, 2019. Figs. 14.3 and 12.2.)

When misrepaired DNA damage occurs, aberrations may then
be produced in chromosomes, resulting in an unstable aberration
(usually lethal to dividing cells) or a stable aberration. Stable aberrations can result in failure of chromosomes to reunite (leading to
deletions) or in abnormal rearrangement of chromosomes, such

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4416 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
as reciprocal translocation or aneuploidy. Although it is logical to
think that these abnormalities in chromosomes lead to variants
that can activate oncogenes or protooncogenes, or cause variants in

Table 758.3  Imaging Modalities
MODALITY

SOURCE

Radiography (digital plain film
x-­ray)

Radiation (x-­ray)

Fluoroscopy and fluoroscopically
guided procedures

Radiation (x-­ray)

Ultrasonography

Sound beams

Computed tomography

Radiation (x-­ray)

Magnetic resonance imaging

Magnetic field with
radiofrequency

Nuclear medicine (including
positron emission tomography)

Radiation (administered isotope)

Table 758.4  Average Radiation Dose by Imaging Test for
Pediatric Population*
EXAMINATION (0-­18 YEARS)

EFFECTIVE DOSE (mSv)

Interventional fluoroscopy: AP
and lateral abdomen

0.2-­1.1 mSv/min

Interventional fluoroscopy: head

0.02-­0.08 mSv/min

Interventional fluoroscopy:
cardiac

0.1-­1 mSv/min

Digital radiography: 2-­view chest

0.04-­0.06

Digital radiography: 2-­view
abdomen

0.1-­0.6

Computed tomography: brain

0.8-­2

Computed tomography: chest

0.5-­4

Computed tomography:
abdomen/pelvis†

1-­9

Nuclear medicine (99mTc
methylene diphosphonate:
bone)

2-­5

Positron emission tomography
(18F-­FDG; whole body)

2-­11

15

Table 758.5  Tissue Reaction Dose Levels
APPROXIMATE THRESHOLD

SKIN
Transient erythema

2 Gy (200 rad)

Dry desquamation

8 Gy (800 rad)

Moist desquamation

15 Gy (1,500 rad)

Temporary epilation

2 Gy (200 rad)

Permanent epilation

7 Gy (700 rad)

EYES
Cataracts (acute)

2 Gy (200 rad)*

*Has been reported as occurring between 0.5 and 1 Gy.

Attributable Lifetime Risk % per Sv

Attributable Lifetime Risk

*Background radiation reference = 0.01 mSv/day or 3 mSv/yr.
†Radiation dose upper limit includes young adult age population.

INJURY

tumor-­suppressor genes (see Chapter 541), few radiation-­induced
cancers show specific translocations such as would be associated
with activation of specific oncogenes or known tumor-­suppressor
genes. An exception is the radiation induction of papillary thyroid
carcinoma in children, which probably results from activation of
the RET oncogene (see Chapter 607).
A longitudinal study of the lifetime risks of excess cancer mortality to irradiation has been evaluated in atomic bomb survivors. More
than 120,000 survivors since 1950 have been followed since exposure;
additionally, 3,600 in utero survivors and their 77,000 progeny have
been followed since 1945. Individual radiation doses were estimated
by considering the person’s location in relation to distance from the
epicenter and individual shielding situations (such as line of sight with
respect to buildings and terrain). Radiation types were mixed, and
most of the exposure was direct gamma irradiation; neutron exposure
was out to approximately 2,000 m. Age at exposure, lifestyle, and other
factors were considered in the analytic models when calculating cancer
occurrence (Fig. 758.2).
The pediatric population is approximately two to three times more
sensitive to radiation-­induced carcinogenesis compared with middle-­
age adults; however, the risk even in this population is indirectly
related to age where the neonate is more sensitive than the older child
to an identical radiation exposure. Because of the higher risks associated with breast and thyroid cancer, females are also more sensitive than males. It must be understood that cancer rates in this study
are mortality figures; the incidence of cancer is approximately twice
that of the mortality incidence for all ages. The Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) reports no scientific evidence demonstrating noncancerous effects (e.g., malformations, growth, intellectual disability, etc.) from in utero exposure <50 mGy, an exposure
level that is greater than essentially any single diagnostic examination
using ionizing radiation. Additionally, noncancerous effects may only
increase slightly with exposure levels between 50 and 500 mGy. In
utero radiation exposure is associated with an excess risk of developing (all types) childhood cancer: 1% (<100 mGy), 1–6% (100-­500
mGy), and >6% (>500 mGy) as compared to 0.7% naturally. Children
are at increased risk of stochastic risks for identical levels of exposure
seen in adults because (1) children are growing rapidly, with many

10

Population averages
Female
Male

5

Females
Males
0
0

50

100

Age at Time of Exposure

Fig. 758.2 Lifetime risk of excess cancer per sievert (Sv) as a function
of age at the time of exposure. Data from the atomic bomb survivors.
The average risk across all ages in a population is approximately 5% per
Sv, but the risk varies considerably with age: children are much more
sensitive than adults. At early ages, girls are more sensitive than boys.
(From Hall EJ. Introduction to session I: Helical CT and cancer risk. Pediatr Radiol. 2002;32:225–227.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 758 u Biologic Effects of Ionizing Radiation on Children
Table 758.6  Inherited Human Syndromes Associated with
Sensitivities to X-­Rays
Ataxia-­telangiectasia
Basal cell nevoid syndrome
Cockayne syndrome
Down syndrome

Fanconi anemia
Gardner syndrome
Nijmegen breakage syndrome
Usher syndrome

Modified from Davis JT, Frush DP. Biologic effects of diagnostic radiation on children.
In: Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2019: p. 5; and Hall EJ. Radiobiology for the Radiologist, 6th ed. Philadelphia:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2006: p. 41.

cells undergoing mitotic activity dependent on undamaged DNA and
chromosomes, and (2) radiation-­induced tumors (except leukemia)
take a relatively long time to develop and children have a longer lifetime. Policies relating to the use of therapeutic abortion have been
established by the ICRP and American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, which state that fetal doses <100 mGy should not
be considered a reason for terminating pregnancy, and that every
woman should be counseled that exposure from a single diagnostic
procedure does not result in tissue effects to the fetus.
Most childhood tumors occur sporadically, but 10–15% of cases
have a strong familial association. Familial tumors have specific chromosomal deletions in common. In some of these tumors (e.g., retinoblastoma), the two-­hit hypothesis is apparent (see Chapter 541).
Individuals with certain congenital diseases are at higher risk for the
development of tumors after irradiation. Table 758.6 lists diseases that
are associated with sensitivity to radiation.

RADIATION EXPOSURE IN DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING
OF CHILDREN

Imaging modalities utilizing ionizing radiation for diagnostic purposes (e.g., CT, nuclear medicine, PET, radiography, and fluoroscopy or
fluoroscopically guided procedures) are commonly utilized; however,
increased awareness of the long-­term risk for cancer induction and
mortality has led to declining pediatric CT use over the past decade.
The European EPI-­CT study found a significant dose-­response relationship between CT-­related radiation exposure and brain cancer as
well as hematologic malignancies in a large international study cohort,
supporting the concept that stochastic effects are a dose-­dependent
probability, with the probability of an effect increasing with radiation
dose. Therefore it is important that we use the lowest dose necessary
to get sufficient diagnostic images. Various federal agencies, healthcare
accrediting bodies, and national professional organizations support this
goal and provide recommendations or requirements for all imaging
examinations to have some retrievable radiation dose estimate, and for
institutions and clinics that provide ionizing radiation imaging services
to track and review patient examination dose levels annually, comparing
these dose levels with expected dose ranges and external benchmarks.
Dose reporting and aggregating software provides the ability to collect and analyze individual examination doses and gives healthcare
providers a powerful tool to correct outlier examinations (i.e., over
exposures), over utilization, and address other systemic errors present
in imaging clinics (such as radiation dose creep with time).

DECREASING UNNECESSARY DIAGNOSTIC
RADIATION IN CHILDREN WHILE STILL OBTAINING
DIAGNOSTIC IMAGES

Ultimately, the lowest radiation dose examination is the imaging
examination performed without ionizing radiation. For an increasing
number of indications, utilization of nonionizing radiation modalities
such as ultrasound or MRI may be the first consideration for diagnosis.
Selecting the correct examination is the responsibility of the requesting
healthcare provider and may involve consultation with the radiologist,
preferably with pediatric expertise. Clinical decision support algorithms are also available to assist with examination appropriateness
(e.g., American College of Radiology’s Appropriateness Criteria). The
risk of using ionizing radiation for imaging should be weighed against

4417

other risks during imaging. CT (depending on the indication and
region examined) may detect as many abnormalities as MRI, but CT
involves ionizing radiation. However, sedation is often required to successfully obtain MRI imaging in young children; in these cases, consideration of the relative risks of cognitive impairment from moderate
sedation and anesthetic versus potential radiation risks use should
come into play.

Reducing Radiation from the CT Examination

The most common source of medical radiation for all ages is CT. CT
offers the ability to acquire high-­quality volumetric imaging datasets in
seconds. For many years, adult parameters for CT settings were used
for children, which led to dosages for children much higher than the
dosage for adults. This occurs because lower energy x-­rays that would
have been absorbed in the near field in an adult pass into the entire
child, with relatively greater organ irradiation for the same exposure.
When comparing dosages given to newborns and adults during CT
scanning of the head, with the same parameters in both groups, the
dosage given to newborns can be four times that of the dosage given to
adults; with abdominal imaging, the dosage is increased by 60%. It is
the role of the radiologist and technologist, with the help of a medical
physicist, to develop and monitor protocols that tailor the examination
to the individual indication and for the variabilities in sizes found in
the pediatric population.
Modern CT scanners have many tools to help administer the appropriate amount of radiation dose to a pediatric patient and acquire the
necessary diagnostic image quality from the imaging examination.
Radiologists should work in conjunction with medical physicists and
vendor supplied application specialists to tailor specific examination
protocols to the pediatric patient population by establishing appropriate scan parameters such as the kilovoltage (kV). Scan range should
be limited to only the necessary area for diagnosis (e.g., a chest only
scan should begin at the lung apices and extend to no more than a
little below the lowest lung base). Multiphasic scanning should be only
obtained when justified; for example, in pediatric abdominopelvic CT
multiple phases should be necessary in no more than approximately
5% of examinations.
Technologic advances for modern CT scanners are using reconstruction algorithms, such as statistical iterative reconstruction
(IR), model-­based IR, and deep learning reconstruction (DLR), as
well as photon counting technology. These algorithms have been
shown to allow the reduction of radiation dose for IR algorithms by
15-30% and DLR algorithms by 44-83% in some patient populations
while maintaining equivalent diagnostic confidence to the pre-­dose
reduced image datasets. Other practical steps to reduce pediatric
population radiation dose include replacing older CT scanners with
technologically advanced scanners; monitoring institution dose values, which can be compared with available benchmarks, such as diagnostic reference levels (DRLs); and performing only examinations
that are justified. Advances in technology and attention to proper
performance of examinations have contributed to overall reductions
in pediatric patient population doses by >50% during the past two
decades.

RADIATION THERAPY: ACUTE AND LATE EFFECTS

Radiation therapy uses high doses to kill malignant cells. The sensitivity of normal cells is quite close to that of malignant cells, and to
achieve significant cure rates, radiation oncologists must accept a given
percentage of serious complications (5–10%). Radiation causes tissue
loss plus injury to the underlying vasculature. The vascular change
may be progressive, leading to arteriocapillary fibrosis and irreparable
injury, in turn leading to further tissue loss.
The acute effects of therapy (occurring less than 3 months after therapy begins) are usually related to the area of the body being irradiated
(except fatigue, which can begin during this time period). These acute
effects include radiation-­induced pneumonitis, dermatitis, mucositis
and esophagitis, cerebral edema, and swelling of the organ irradiated.
There may be changes in bowel movement patterns. Of these, one of
the most severe acute reactions is pneumonitis. It can manifest within

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4418 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
Table 758.7  Late Effects of Radiation Therapy in Children
Treated for Cancer
SYSTEM

LATE EFFECT

DOSE (GY)

Musculoskeletal

Muscular hypoplasia
Scoliosis, kyphosis, lordosis
Osteocartilaginous exostosis/
osteochondroma

>20
>20
>12

Neuroendocrine
(cranial or
cranial spinal)

Impaired growth hormone
Adrenocorticotropic hormone
deficiency
Thyrotropin-­releasing deficiency
Precocious puberty (females
mostly)
Gonadotropin deficiency

>15
>30

Gonad failure

Ovarian failure
Testicular failure

>10
>3

Central nervous
system
dysfunction

Structured changes
Cognitive changes/Processing
speed

>18
Variable

Other

Pulmonary fibrosis
Nephropathy
Liver disease

>15
>20
>30 (>60%
liver volume)
>50
>5

Cerebral arteriopathy
Eye impairment (cataracts,
legally blind, double vision,
dry eyes)
Hearing loss
Dental abnormalities
Cardiac impairment

>40
>18
>30

>30
>20
>30

24 hours of irradiation when there is an exudation of proteinaceous
material into the alveoli and interalveolar edema. Most often, however, radiation pneumonitis begins 2-­6 months after the beginning
of radiation with a clinical presentation of fever, cough, congestion,
and pruritic pain. The late effects of therapy (beginning more than 3
months after therapy) are numerous (Table 758.7). The most common
are abnormalities of musculoskeletal development, endocrine/reproductive function, pulmonary function, neurocognition, hearing loss,
cardiac function, eye impairment, and dental abnormalities.
As of 2020, there are more than 500,000 childhood cancer survivors
in the United States. The risk of developing a second cancer among
cancer survivors is over fivefold higher than the general population.
Second cancers account for 2.3% of all cancers in children; this reflects
an overall standard incidence rate (SIR) of 5.5%. Primary malignancies with the highest cumulative incidence of a second neoplasm in the
order of frequency are retinoblastoma (10.4%), CNS cancers (7.4%),
cancers of bone (7.2%), soft tissue sarcomas (6.5%), hepatic cancer
(5.9%), and neuroblastoma (5.9%) [data from the U.S. Surveillance,
Epidemiology, and End Results program (SEER)]. Table 758.8 relates
second cancers to primary cancer and latency period. Almost 70% of
the second neoplasms are in the field of the original irradiation. Radiation therapy increases the risk of second cancers in a dose-­dependent
manner for nongenetic neoplasms.
The exact complications depend on the location of the treatment
field. In children, because of the location of many childhood tumors,
the normal brain is commonly in the treatment field. Standard irradiation of the brain in children results in cortical atrophy in more than
half of patients who receive 20-­60 Gy; 26% are left with white matter changes (leukoencephalopathy) and 8% with calcifications. The
younger the child is at the time of irradiation, the greater the atrophy. Some patients also demonstrate mineralizing microangiopathy.
Radiation-­induced changes of the brain are potentiated by methotrexate administered before, during, or after radiation therapy.

Cerebral necrosis is a serious complication of radiation-­induced
vascular disease. It is usually diagnosed 1-­5 years after irradiation but
can occur up to a decade later. Brain necrosis may manifest as headache, increased intracranial pressure, seizures, sensory deficits, and
psychotic changes.
Spinal cord irradiation may result in radiation myelitis, which may
be either transient or permanent. Acute transient myelitis often appears
2-­4 months after irradiation. Patients with myelitis usually present with
Lhermitte sign, a sensation of little electrical shocks radiating down
the spine into the arms and legs, occurring with neck flexion or other
movements that stretch the spinal cord. Reversal of transient myelopathy usually occurs between 8 and 40 weeks and does not necessarily
progress to delayed necrosis.
Delayed myelopathy occurs after a mean latent period of 20 months
but can occur earlier if the total dose or the dose per fraction is high.
It usually manifests as discontinuous deterioration and is irreversible.
In the cervical and thoracic regions, sensory dissociation develops,
followed by spastic and then flaccid paresis. In the lumbar cord, flaccid paresis is dominant. The mortality for high thoracic and cervical
lesions reaches 70% with death commonly being due to pneumonia
and urinary tract infections.
CNS irradiation may affect growth by compromising function of the
pituitary-­hypothalamic axis and leading to diminishing growth hormone production and release. Non–growth hormone tropins may also
be affected by CNS irradiation, leading to gonadotropin deficiency or
precocious puberty. Central hypothyroidism can also develop. CNS
irradiation also compromises bone mineral deposition both locally (in
the radiation field) and systemically.
Irradiation has other effects specific to children. Scoliosis and
hypoplasia of bones may occur if fractionated treatment schemes
exceed 4,000 rad. Fractionated doses higher than 25 Gy can result
in slipped capital femoral epiphyses. An increase in the incidence of
benign osteochondromas has been reported after childhood irradiation. Chest wall irradiation in females (besides causing breast cancer)
may impair breast development and/or cause fibrosis and atrophy of
breast tissue.

WHOLE BODY IRRADIATION
Uncontrolled Large-­or Small-­Scale Exposure to
Radiation

Large-­scale exposure to radiation can occur in an event of nuclear accidents, war, or terrorist attacks (Fig. 758.3). Radiation as well as explosive and thermal injury need to be considered.

Clinical Manifestations

A large single exposure of penetrating radiation can result in acute
radiation syndrome (Table 758.9). The signs and symptoms of this
syndrome result from damage to major organ systems that have different levels of radiation sensitivity, modulated by the rate at which
the radiation exposure occurred. Delivery of 1 Gy in 1 minute would
be symptomatic, but delivery of 1 cGy/day for 100 days would not be
symptomatic.
The hematopoietic syndrome results from acute whole body
doses >0.7-­10 Gy; where healthy patients will almost always recover
from doses <2 Gy. The dose that kills 50% of a population in 60 days
is approximately 3.5-­4.5 Gy, where effective blood transfusions and
antibiotics may extend the dose range to 5-­8 Gy. Doses >8 Gy almost
always lead to hematopoietic-­induced death. Symptoms of exposure
consist of a prodromal phase during which the patient will experience nausea/vomiting, diarrhea, and fatigue within the first 12 hours,
with symptoms usually lasting up to 48 hours. A latent period of 2-­3
weeks, during which patients may feel quite well, follows. Although
patients are asymptomatic, bone marrow impairment has occurred.
The most obvious laboratory finding is lymphocyte depression (Table
758.10). Maximal bone marrow depression occurs approximately 30
days after exposure, when hemorrhage and infection can be major
problems. If the bone marrow was not completely eradicated, a recovery phase then ensues. This radiation effect is similar to what occurs
when whole body irradiation (given as 12 Gy in two treatments) is used

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 758 u Biologic Effects of Ionizing Radiation on Children

4419

Table 758.8  Second Cancers and Their Relationship with Primary Cancers
SECOND CANCERS

LATENCY (MEDIAN
IN YEARS)

PRIMARY CANCERS

RISK FACTORS

Brain tumors

ALL; brain tumors; HD

9-­10

Radiation; younger age

Myelodysplastic syndromes/
acute myelogenous leukemia

ALL; HD; bone tumors

3-­5

Topoisomerase II inhibitors;
alkylating agents

Breast cancer

HD; bone tumors; soft tissue sarcomas; ALL; brain
tumors; Wilms tumors; NHL

15-­20

Radiation; female gender

Thyroid cancer

ALL: HD; neuroblastoma; soft tissue sarcomas; bone
tumors; NHL

13-­15

Radiation; younger age;
female gender

Bone tumors

Retinoblastoma (heritable); other bone tumors; Ewing
sarcoma; soft tissue sarcomas; ALL

9-­10

Radiation; alkylating agents;
removal of the spleen

Soft tissue sarcomas

Retinoblastoma (heritable); soft tissue sarcomas; HD;
Wilms tumors; bone tumors; ALL

10-­11

Radiation; younger age;
anthracyclines

ALL, Acute lymphocytic leukemia; HD, Hodgkin disease; NHL, non-­Hodgkin lymphoma.
From Bhatia S, Sklar S. Second cancers in survivors of childhood cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2002;2:124–132.

Management of radiation sickness based on early symptoms

No
vomiting

Vomiting
>2 hr after
exposure

Vomiting
1-2 hr after
exposure

Vomiting in <1 hr,
diarrhea, hypotension,
hyperthermia, erythema,
(central nervous system
symptoms at >10 Gy)

<1 Gy

1-2 Gy

2-4 Gy

>4 Gy

Outpatient
surveillance
(3-5 wk)

Surveillance
in general
hospital

Hospitalization
in a department
of hematology

Hospitalization
in a center of
radiopathology

Fig. 758.3 Management algorithm for radiation sickness at different

levels of medical care, depending on the appearance of early symptoms and the estimated radiation dose to the whole body. (From Turai
I, Veress K, Günalp B, et al. Medical response to radiation incidents and
radionuclear threats. BMJ. 2004;328:568–572.)

to obliterate the bone marrow in children with leukemia before bone
marrow transplantation.
The gastrointestinal (GI) syndrome occurs from acute whole body
doses >6-­10 Gy. Prompt onset of nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea follows. There is a latent period of approximately 1 week if intense medical treatment is administered. Following the latent period, recurrence
of GI symptoms, sepsis, and electrolyte imbalance occurs, which results
in death at about 2 weeks postexposure from GI tract and bone marrow
destruction.
At dose levels exceeding 20-­50 Gy, the cardiovascular/CNS syndrome predominates. Nausea, vomiting, prostration, hypotension,
ataxia, and convulsions are almost immediate. The latent period occurs
between 4 and 6 hours postexposure followed by severe manifestation
of the initial illness stage leading to eventual coma and death within
2-­3 days.

Treatment

For the hematopoietic and GI syndromes, treatment is supportive
involving transfusions and Neupogen (filgrastim), Neulasta (pegfilgrastim) and other hematopoietic growth factors, fluids, and, if infected
antibiotics and antiviral agents. Stem cell (bone marrow) transplantation may be needed in severe cases.

Localized Irradiation
Clinical Manifestations

Because localized exposure involves a small amount of tissue, systemic
manifestations may be less severe, and patients may survive even if
locally absorbed doses are very high. The hand is the most common
site for accidental localized irradiation injuries, usually as a result of
picking up or playing with lost radiation sources. The second most
common accidental site is the thigh and buttocks, predominantly from
placing unsuspected highly radioactive sources in the pockets.
Table 758.11 lists the skin changes that occur after a single acute,
localized irradiation. As opposed to other forms of thermal burns,
signs of irradiation appear a period of days after the exposure. Vascular
insufficiency may appear months to years later and cause ulcerations
or necrosis in formerly healed areas. The penetrability of the radiation
is an important factor in the outcome of local radiation injury. Beta
particles from heavy radiation fallout can cause superficial skin burns
because they have low penetrability.
Some tissues that may receive localized radiation exposure are relatively radiosensitive. Cataract formation (see Chapter 668) may occur
with single γ-­ray exposures in the range of <1 Gy. Such cataracts usually take from 2 months to several years to develop. Oligospermia may
take up to 2 months to develop. Transient infertility in men may result
from doses as low as 0.15 Gy, and permanent sterility may occur in
males at dose levels between 3 and 6 Gy.

Treatment

Skin therapy is directed at prevention of infections. Treatment of localized injuries usually involves class II to III topical steroids and plastic
surgery and grafting, if the radiation exposure was not deeply penetrating (see Chapter 89). The nature of the surgery depends on the dose at
various depths in tissue and the location of the lesion. The full expression of radiation injury often is not apparent for 1-­2 years due to slow
arteriolar narrowing that can cause delayed necrosis. After relatively
penetrating radiation, amputation may be necessary because of obliterative changes in small vessels.

INTERNAL CONTAMINATION
Epidemiology

Accidents involving internal contamination are rare and are usually the
result of misadministration in hospital settings or voluntary ingestion
of unsuspected contaminated radioactive materials. Other possible
causes of internal contamination of children include ingestion of breast
milk from mothers who have had diagnostic nuclear medicine scans
and radiation exposure when a parent or sibling receives a therapeutic
dose of iodine-­131.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4420 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
Table 758.9  Acute Radiation Syndrome
MANIFEST ILLNESS
STAGE

SYNDROME

DOSE*

PRODROMAL STAGE

LATENT STAGE

Hematopoietic (bone
marrow)

>0.7 Gy (>70 rads)
(mild symptoms may
occur as low as 0.3
Gy or 30 rads)

• Symptoms are
anorexia, nausea
and vomiting
• Onset occurs 1
hr to 2 days after
exposure
• Stage lasts for
minutes to days

• Stem cells in
bone marrow are
dying, although
patient may
appear and feel
well
• Stage lasts 1-­6
wk

• Symptoms are
anorexia, fever, and
malaise
• Drop in all blood cell
counts occurs for
several weeks
• Primary cause of
death is infection and
hemorrhage
• Survival decreases
with increasing dose
• Most deaths occur
within a few months
after exposure

RECOVERY
• In most cases,
bone marrow
cells will begin to
repopulate the
marrow
• There should be
full recovery for a
large percentage
of individuals from
a few weeks up to
2 yr after exposure
• Death may occur in
some individuals at
1.2 Gy (120 rads)
• The LD50/60† is
about 2.5-­5 Gy
(250-­500 rads)

Gastrointestinal (GI)

>10 Gy (>1,000 rads)
(some symptoms
may occur as low
as 6 Gy or 600
rads)

• Symptoms are
anorexia, severe
nausea, vomiting,
cramps, and
diarrhea
• Onset occurs within
a few hours after
exposure
• Stage lasts about 2
days

• Stem cells in
bone marrow
and cells lining
GI tract are
dying, although
patient may
appear and feel
well
• Stage lasts <1
wk

• Symptoms are
malaise, anorexia,
severe diarrhea, fever,
dehydration, and
electrolyte imbalance
• Death is due
to infection,
dehydration, and
electrolyte imbalance
• Death occurs within 2
wk of exposure

• The LD100‡ is about
10 Gy (1,000 rads)

Cardiovascular (CV)/
central nervous
system (CNS)

>50 Gy (5,000 rads)
(some symptoms
may occur as low
as 20 Gy or 2,000
rads)

• Symptoms are
extreme nervousness
and confusion;
severe nausea,
vomiting, and watery
diarrhea; loss of
consciousness; and
burning sensations
of the skin
• Onset occurs within
minutes of exposure
• Stage lasts for
minutes to hours

• Patient may
return to partial
functionality
• Stage may last
for hours but
often is less

• Symptoms are return
of watery diarrhea,
convulsions, and
coma
• Onset occurs 5-­6 hr
after exposure
• Death occurs within 3
days of exposure

• No recovery is
expected

*The absorbed doses quoted here are “gamma equivalent” values. Neutrons or protons generally produce the same effects as γ-­, β-­, or x-­rays but at lower doses. If the patient has
been exposed to neutrons or protons, consult radiation experts on how to interpret the dose.
†The LD /60 is the dose necessary to kill 50% of the exposed population in 60 days.
50
‡The LD
100 is the dose necessary to kill 100% of the exposed population.
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Acute radiation syndrome: a fact sheet for clinicians. Table 1. https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/radiation/emergencies/arsphysicianfa
ctsheet.htm.

Table 758.10  Expected Outcome Based on Absolute
Lymphocyte Count After Acute Penetrating
Whole Body Irradiation
MINIMAL LYMPHOCYTE COUNT
WITHIN FIRST 48 HR AFTER
EXPOSURE

PROGNOSIS

1,000-­3,000 (normal range)

No significant injury

1,000-­1,500

Significant but probably
nonlethal injury, good
prognosis

500-­1,000

Severe injury, fair prognosis

100-­500

Very severe injury, poor
prognosis

<100

Lethal without compatible
bone marrow donor

Clinical Manifestations

The hazards from internal contamination depend on the nature of
both the radionuclide (particularly in terms of its solubility in water,
half-­life, biologic half-­life, and radioactive emission) and the chemical
compound.

Treatment

The most effective treatment requires knowledge of both the radionuclide and the chemical form. Treatment must be instituted quickly
to be effective (Table 758.12). Removal treatment involves cleaning
a contaminated wound and performing gastric lavage or administration of cathartics in the case of ingestion. Administration of alginate-­
containing antacids (e.g., Gaviscon) also usually helps in removal by
decreasing absorption in the GI tract. An example of blocking therapy is the administration of potassium iodine or other stable iodine-­
containing compounds to patients with known internal contamination
with radioactive iodine. The stable iodine effectively blocks the thyroid,
although its effectiveness decreases rapidly as time elapses after the
contamination. The recommended dose of potassium iodine is 16 mg

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 758 u Biologic Effects of Ionizing Radiation on Children
for neonates (up to 1 month of age); 32 mg for children ages 1 month
to 3 years; 65 mg for children ages 3-­18 years (if less than 70 kg), and
130 mg for adults and adolescents >70 kg. Each dose protects for only
1 day. Dilution therapy is used in cases of tritium (radioactive hydrogen as water) contamination. Forcing fluids promotes excretion. Cases
of internal contamination with transuranic elements (americium and

4421

plutonium) may require chelation therapy with calcium diethylenetriamine pentaacetate.
Prussian blue is a drug approved by the FDA for patients with
internal contamination with cesium or thallium. It can speed fecal
elimination of radioactive cesium from the body. It acts by intercepting
the cesium coming into the gut from the bile. Prussian blue prevents

Table 758.11  Skin Changes After a Single, Acute, Localized Radiation Exposure
APPROXIMATE
THRESHOLD (GY)

CHANGE

2-­4

Primary erythema within hours of exposure (appears more quickly after larger doses)

3

Second phase erythema (develops during the manifestation phase of local radiation injury); appears 14-­21 days after
exposure

3

Temporary epilation (14-­18 days after exposure)

7

Definitive epilation (25-­30 days after exposure)

10

Dry desquamation (20-­28 days after exposure)

15

Moist desquamation, possible ulceration (15-­25 days after exposure)

25

Desquamation with blistering, ulceration, and necrosis (>21 days after exposure)

Data from the International Atomic Energy Agency. Safety Reports Series, No. 101: Medical management of radiation injuries, 2020. https://www-­pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/P
DF/PUB1891_web.pdf

Table 758.12  	Decontamination of Common Elements in Industrial and Medical Accidents
ELEMENT

EMISSIONS

CRITICAL ORGAN

EFFECTIVE T1/2*

DECONTAMINATION

Cesium-137

Beta, gamma

Total body

70 days

Prussian blue
(Radiogardase) 3 g po
3 times/day (adults and
adolescents); 1 g po 3
times/day (2-12 yr old);
consider lavage and
purgatives

Cobalt-60

Beta, gamma

Total body

10 days

Lavage, purgatives,
penicillamine

Iodine-125, iodine-131

Beta, gamma

Thyroid

Iodine-125, 42 days;
iodine-131, 8 days

Potassium iodide:
0-1 mo, 16 mg/day
> 1 mo to 3 yr, 32 mg/day
> 3 mo to 3 yr, 32 mg/day
> 3 to 12 yr and
< 70 kg, 65 mg/day
adults or ≥ 70 kg,
130 mg/day; consider
lavage

Iridium-192

Beta, gamma

Lung

74 days

Lavage for large quantities

Technetium-99 m

Gamma

Total body

5 hours

Potassium perchlorate to
reduce thyroid dose

Tritium-3

Beta

Total body

12 days

Forced fluids

Uranium-235, uranium-238

Alpha

Kidney,† bone, liver, lung

Can be permanent if in
bone

Bicarbonate to alkalinize
the urine

*Effective t1/2 combines radioactive and chemical properties and rates of elimination without decontamination efforts.
†The kidney is most vulnerable to large amounts of uranium because of the chemical properties of this heavy metal. Uranium can ultimately be deposited in bone.
po, Per os; qd, once per day.
Data from U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Prussian blue, Radiogardase, package insert. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/cder/drug/infopage/prussian_blue/default.htm; U.S.
Food and Drug Administration. Guidance: Potassium iodide as a thyroid blocking agent in radiation emergencies. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/cder/guidance/4825fnl.htm;
Management of Persons Accidentally Contaminated with Radionuclides. NCRP Report No. 65. Bethesda, MD: National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements; 1980;
and Jarrett D, ed. Medical Management of Radiation Casualties: Handbook. 2nd ed. AFRRI Special Publication 03-1. Bethesda, MD: Armed Forces Radiobiology Research Institute;
2003. Available at: http://www.afrri.usuhs.mil.
From Linder JA, Linder LS: Radiation accident—dispersed exposure. In Ciottone GR (ed). Ciottone’s Disaster Medicine, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2016. Table 108-1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4422 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
Table 758.13  Nuclear Regulatory Commission Guidelines
on Breastfeeding During the Period During
a Nuclear Medicine Examination
RADIOPHARMACEUTICAL

BREASTFEEDING CESSATION

11C, 13N, 15O, 82Rb

None

18F-­labeled

12 hr

68Ga-­labeled

12 hr

99mTc-­labeled

24 hr

123-­I Sodium iodide

7 days

111In-­leukocytes

7 days

99m-­Tc labeled

No interruption*

201Tl chloride

14 days

67Ga and 89Zr

28 days

177Lu, diagnostic

35 days

131I-­NaI

Stop breastfeeding

177Lu, therapeutic

Stop breastfeeding

223Ra and all alpha emitters

Stop breastfeeding

*The guideline for 99mTc compounds is a 24-­hr interruption for >1110 MBq administered,
12 hr for 444-­1110 MBq, and no interruption for <444 MBq administered. The normally
administered activity is below activities that require any interruption.
From Dilsizian V, Metter D, Palestro C, Zanaonico P. The Advisory Committee on
Medical Uses of Isotomes (ACMUI) Sub-­Committee on Nursing Mother Guidelines for
the Medical Administration of Radioactive Materials, 2018, p. 12. https://www.nrc.gov/d
ocs/ML1803/ML18033B034.pdf

cesium from being absorbed again from the gut. Prussian blue can be
given days after ingestion, unlike potassium iodine, which must be
given initially in the first 12-­24 hours after exposure.
In the case of breastfeeding after a nuclear medicine procedure,
two primary concerns are considered: (1) the internal dose to the
infant passed through the excreted milk and (2) the dose from the
radiopharmaceutical absorption in the female breast that exposes
the infant to external γ-­rays while undergoing decay. Most imaging
radiopharmaceuticals are below the activity calculated to expose
the infant to a dose of 1 mSv via either internal or external mode
of exposure. Table 758.13 provides a comprehensive list of radiopharmaceuticals and the recommended period for breastfeeding
cessation by the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission. In the case
of delaying breastfeeding, pumped milk may be stored for the times
indicated in Table 758.13, after which they will be safe to feed the
infant.

EXTERNAL CONTAMINATION

The presence of external radioactive contamination on a patient’s
skin is not an immediate medical emergency. Management involves
removing and controlling the spread of radioactive materials. If a
patient has suspected surface contamination and no physical injuries, decontamination can be performed relatively easily. If substantial physical trauma or other life-­threatening injuries are combined
with external contamination, surface decontamination should proceed only after the patient has been stabilized physiologically. In
many accident situations, essential medical care may be delayed
inappropriately by hospital emergency staff because of fear of radiation or spread of contamination in the hospital. After a radiation
accident, triaging of patients is critical and is based on exposure and
symptoms (see Fig. 758.3).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 759

Chemical Pollutants
Joel A. Forman and Lauren M. Zajac
More than 85,000 new synthetic chemicals have been developed in the
past 75 years. These chemicals are used in millions of products, ranging from food packaging to clothing, building materials, motor fuels,
cleaning products, cosmetics, medical products, toys, and baby bottles.
Synthetic chemicals are widely disseminated in the environment. The
Toxic Release Inventory of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) reports that in 2021, of 29.3 billion pounds of production-­
related chemical waste managed, nearly 3.3 billion pounds (11%) were
discharged into air, water, and land in the United States. These chemicals are detected today in even the most remote corners of the planet,
such as the polar icecaps and in the ocean depths.
All people are at daily risk of exposure to synthetic chemicals, and
children are especially likely to be exposed to the nearly 3,000 chemicals that are produced in amounts of 1 million pounds or more per
year, designated by the EPA as high-­production-­volume chemicals.
Biomonitoring data on blood and urine levels of more than 400 high-­
production-­volume chemicals are obtained annually by the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention in a sample of the U.S. population through the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
(NHANES). These data document that most Americans, including
children, are routinely exposed to scores of synthetic chemicals; exposure often falls disproportionately on poor children and children
of color. Examples are wide ranging and include lead, air pollutants,
endocrine disrupting chemicals like phthalates, and many others.
Toxic chemicals are exported in ever-­increasing quantities to the
world’s poorer countries as these countries undergo industrial development. Environmental safeguards in those countries are typically not
as stringent as in high-­income countries, and the potential for serious
exposure is therefore high. Examples of tragedies that have resulted
from the movement of toxic chemicals to low-­and middle-­income
countries include the Bhopal disaster in India, in which hundreds were
killed and thousands injured by methylisocyanate gas released by an
explosion in a pesticide production facility, and the ongoing export
each year of more than 2 million tons of newly produced asbestos to the
world’s poorest countries, where this asbestos is responsible for nearly
200,000 deaths annually from asbestosis, lung cancer, and malignant
mesothelioma.

SYNTHETIC CHEMICALS AND HUMAN HEALTH

A recurrent pattern is that chemicals are brought to market with great
enthusiasm, presumed harmless, and undergo little or no premarket
safety testing. Then years or decades later, after they had come into
wide use, the chemicals were found to be harmful to children’s health.
Often the first cases of disease caused by these chemicals are clinically severe, but as time passes, evidence of widespread subclinical toxicity comes to light.
Classic historical examples of epidemics caused by inadequately
tested toxic chemicals include the following:
• Tetraethyl lead: This was added to gasoline in the United States from
the early 1920s until 1980. It was responsible for widespread lead
poisoning, initially evident as an epidemic of acute toxicity manifesting as encephalopathy, seizures, and even death, but later demonstrated to have caused subclinical neurotoxicity and reduction in
IQ across two generations of U.S. children (see Chapter 761).
• Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT): This pesticide very nearly
led to extinction of the osprey and the American bald eagle and
more recently has been linked to increased risk for breast cancer
among women exposed decades ago in utero.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 759 u Chemical Pollutants
• Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs): These are highly persistent pollutants banned from production in the United States in 1977, which
continue today to contaminate major lakes and rivers and have been
found also to be responsible for loss of IQ and disruption of behavior
in children.
• Chlorofluorocarbons: These destroy the ozone.
Other examples of synthetic chemicals that came into wide use with
little assessment of their safety and are now recognized as causing harm
to children’s health include the following:
• Phthalates: These chemicals are added to plastics, cosmetics, medical equipment like intravenous tubing, and common household
products that are now linked to increased risk for reproductive
abnormalities in male infants and heightened risk of behavioral
abnormalities such as attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder (see
Chapter 50).
• Polybrominated diphenyl ethers: These are used as flame retardants in
carpets, furniture, and electronic equipment and are now linked to
persistent loss of intelligence and disruption of behavior in children.
• Bisphenol A: A plastics chemical linked to neurodevelopmental disorders.
These chemicals are all produced in volumes of millions of tons per
year, are widely disseminated in the environment, and are detectable in
the bodies of nearly all Americans. Only decades after their introduction are these chemicals’ risks to children beginning to be recognized.

CHILDREN’S UNIQUE SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
SYNTHETIC CHEMICALS

The health effects of synthetic chemicals are especially serious when
exposure occurs during windows of vulnerability in early life such as
during pregnancy, infancy, and early childhood. Children are highly
vulnerable to chemical pollutants for several reasons:
1.	Children have proportionally greater exposure to environmental
pollutants than adults. Because they drink more water, eat more
food, and breathe more air per kilogram of body weight, children are
more heavily exposed to pollutants in water, food, and air. Children’s
hand-­to-­mouth behavior and their play close to the ground further
magnify their exposures.
2.	Children’s metabolic pathways, especially in the first few months
after birth, are immature. Although in some instances children are
better able than adults to cope with environmental toxicants because
they cannot metabolize these chemicals to their active forms, more
commonly children are not as able as adults to detoxify and excrete
chemical pollutants.
3.	Infants and children are growing and developing, and their complex,
fast-­moving, and highly choreographed developmental processes are
exquisitely sensitive to disruption by chemical pollutants. Exposures
to even minute doses of toxic chemicals during windows of vulnerability in early development have been shown to cause a wide array
of diseases in childhood and to increase risk for chronic disease and
disability lifelong (Table 759.1).
4.	Because children have many future years of life, they have time for
the development of multistage chronic diseases that may be triggered by early exposures.

SAFETY TESTING OF SYNTHETIC CHEMICALS

Legally mandated testing of chemicals for safety and toxicity coupled
with strict controls on dangerous chemicals are the linchpins of chemical safety. Strong chemical safety policies are needed to protect children against disease and death caused by chemicals. A fundamental
problem in environmental pediatrics today is that chemical safety
policies in many countries are weak. Only approximately 65% of
high-­production-­volume chemicals have been tested for their safety
or potential hazard to human health, and fewer than 30% have been
assessed for their pediatric or developmental toxicity.
Failure to test chemicals for safety and toxicity reflects the chemical industry’s unwillingness to take responsibility for the products they
produce coupled with long-­standing failure of the previous U.S. federal
law on chemical safety, the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA). Only
five chemicals were banned or controlled under the original TSCA law:

4423

Table 759.1  Effects of Selected Chemical Pollutants on
Infants and Children
CHEMICAL POLLUTANT

EFFECT(S)

Air pollution

Asthma, other respiratory
diseases, sudden infant death
syndrome

Asbestos

Mesothelioma and lung cancer

Benzene, nitrosamine, vinyl
chloride, ionizing radiation

Cancer

Environmental tobacco smoke

Increased risk of sudden infant
death syndrome and asthma

Ethyl alcohol

Fetal alcohol syndrome after
intrauterine exposure

Lead

Neurobehavioral toxicity from
low-­dose exposure

Methyl mercury

Developmental neurotoxicity

Organophosphate insecticides

Developmental neurotoxicity

Per-­ and poly-­fluoroalkyl
substances (PFAS)

Increased cholesterol levels,
altered liver function tests,
decreased antibody response
to childhood vaccines

Polychlorinated biphenyls

Developmental neurotoxicity

Polybrominated diphenyl ethers

Developmental neurotoxicity

Phthalates

Developmental neurotoxicity and
reproductive impairment

Trichloroethylene

Elevated risk of leukemia after
intrauterine exposure

PCBs, the ozone-­destroying chlorofluorocarbons, and three known
human carcinogens—dioxin, asbestos, and hexavalent chromium.
To address the problem of exposure to untested chemicals, countries have enacted stronger chemical safety legislation. In 2007, the
European Union enacted the Registration, Evaluation, Authorization,
and Restriction of Chemical Substances (REACH) legislation. This law
places responsibility on industry to generate data on potential risks of
commercial chemicals and to register this information with the European Chemical Agency in Helsinki. The European Union is using this
information to craft regulations to protect children’s health. Since 2009
REACH has restricted more than 1,000 toxic substances.
In June 2016, the United States passed legislation to revamp TSCA.
This law—the Frank R. Lautenberg Chemical Safety for the 21st Century Act—requires the EPA to assess the safety of any new chemical
before it is allowed to enter the market, to prioritize safety testing of
existing chemicals, and to use a risk-­based standard to evaluate chemical safety that considers only hazards to health and is blind to the
costs of protective action. This law holds much promise for improving
the protection of children’s health against toxic chemicals, but it also
includes a federal preemption clause that could inhibit state-­based protective regulations. Transparency, oversight, and advocacy is critical to
ensuring that the law is implemented in a timely manner that is true to
the intent to prioritize children’s health.
The UN Environment Programme (UNEP) is the United Nations
agency responsible for chemical safety. UNEP has called for “a global
commitment to the sound management of chemicals. The agency supports and tracks the progress of international agreements and treaties
limiting the manufacture, environmental release and global transport
of persistent pollutants, pesticides, hazardous waste, and mercury.” The
Strategic Approach to International Chemicals Management, a program supported by UNEP, provides a platform for coordinating international control of toxic chemicals and hazardous waste across a broad

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4424 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
range of stakeholders. UNEP has worked closely with the World Health
Organization (WHO) to coordinate the removal of lead from gasoline
in countries around the world.

SYNTHETIC CHEMICALS AND DISEASE IN
CHILDREN

A large and growing body of evidence documents that toxic chemicals
can cause disease, disability, and death in children. High-­dose exposures can cause acute, clinically evident disease. Lower-­dose exposures
can cause subclinical injury (injury that is very real but detectable only
through special testing), such as decreases in intelligence, shortening
of attention span, reductions in fertility, and slowing of lung growth.
When exposure to a neurotoxic pollutant is widespread, the resulting
widespread subclinical neurotoxicity can reduce the intelligence, creativity, and economic productivity of entire societies.
Exposures to toxic chemicals in early life are linked not only to
increased risks of disease in childhood, but also to increased risks of
disease in later life. This recognition, termed the developmental origins
of health and disease concept, derives from studies conducted by Barker
and colleagues who found that undernutrition in utero is associated
decades later with increased risks for hypertension, obesity, diabetes,
and cardiovascular disease. Epigenetic programming of gene expression during windows of vulnerability in early development appears
to be the underlying mechanism. Increased risks for disease in adult
life have now been associated also with early-­life exposures to toxic
chemicals and appear to be mediated through epigenetic changes in
gene expression. Among the health problems linked to toxic chemical exposures in early life are decreased cognition in adults who were
exposed as children to lead, neurobehavioral disorders in children
exposed to a range of developmental neurotoxicants, and cancer.

CHEMICAL POLLUTANTS OF MAJOR CONCERN
Air Pollutants

Air pollution—ambient air pollution and household air pollution—is
the world’s largest environmental threat to health and, according to the
WHO, is responsible for an estimated 6.7 million deaths each year. The
air pollutants of greatest concern for children’s health are particulate
matter (especially fine particulates less than 2.5 microns in aerodynamic diameter), photochemical oxidants (especially ozone), oxides
of nitrogen, sulfur oxides, and carbon monoxide; these are the “criteria air pollutants” regulated by the U.S. EPA in the Clean Air Act.
In the United States, approximately 60% of children live in areas that
do not meet national ambient air quality standards (NAAQS), most
commonly particulate matter and ozone. Globally, ambient levels of air
pollutants can be magnitudes higher than the United States.
Fuel combustion is the principal source of air pollution. In high-­
and middle-­income countries, combustion of fossil fuels—coal, oil,
and gas—accounts for most air pollution. In low-­income and lower
middle-­income countries, the major source is burning of biomass, such
as wood, dung, straw, and charcoal. Coal is the single most highly polluting fossil fuel and the most important source of the greenhouse gas
emissions that drive global climate change, but fixed and mobile oil and
gas combustion are also major contributors. As the climate changes,
wildfires are becoming more common and are further contributing to
air pollution and climate change.
Elevated levels of ambient air pollutants are associated with respiratory problems in children, including decreased expiratory volume,
wheezing, exacerbations of asthma, and slowed lung growth. Slowed
lung growth leads to decreased lung volume and increases risk for
respiratory disease in childhood, adolescence, and adult life. Long-­term
improvements in ambient air quality, especially reductions in levels of
particulates and oxides of nitrogen, are associated with statistically and
clinically significant improvements in lung growth in children, effects
that appear likely to persist into adulthood and to reduce lifetime risk
of pulmonary and cardiovascular disease.
Aside from the criteria air pollutants, other pollutants emitted from
mobile, stationary, and area sources are considered hazardous air pollutants (HAPs), which are known or suspected to cause cancer, reproductive effects, or birth defects. Some common examples are metals

such as mercury (neurotoxin), asbestos (mesothelioma, lung cancer),
and volatile organic compounds such as polychloroethylene (reproductive effects, cancer). Diesel exhaust is a particularly concerning source
of air pollution as it contains fine and ultrafine particulates (capable of
reaching alveoli and getting absorbed into bloodstream) and multiple
HAPs (e.g., formaldehyde), and has been classified by the International
Agency for Research on Cancer as a known human carcinogen.
The effects of household air pollution on children’s health are magnified by the fact that many children spend 80–90% of their time
indoors, and pollutant levels can be 2-­5 times higher indoors especially
in poorly ventilated spaces. In 2020, the WHO estimated that 237,000
children <5 years old died from illnesses attributable to household air
pollution. Secondhand tobacco smoke (SHS) is an especially hazardous
constituent of indoor air pollution and a powerful trigger for asthma
(see Chapter 759.1). Household products, particularly some disinfectants, cleaners, paints, and floor finishes, have also been connected to
respiratory tract irritation and increased asthma morbidity. Allergens
in indoor air can contribute to respiratory problems and include cockroach, mite, mold, and cat and dog allergens.

HEALTH HAZARDS OF UNCONVENTIONAL
NATURAL GAS DEVELOPMENT (FRACKING)

Unconventional natural gas development (UNGD) using high-­volume
horizontal hydraulic fracturing (fracking) has made possible the cost-­
effective extraction of natural gas from previously inaccessible underground shale deposits and has catalyzed a 16-­fold increase in fracking
wells in the United States between 2000 and 2020. Natural gas has
surpassed coal to become the major source of electricity generation in
North America.
In fracking, large volumes of water containing a mix of chemicals
(whose composition is a closely guarded secret) are injected at very
high pressure through deep wells into shale deposits to break apart the
rock and allow release of gas. The gas is brought up to the wellhead
through return pipes, collected, and sent to market. In some areas, gas
and oil occur together, and the gas may be burned off (flared) at the
wellhead while the more valuable oil is piped to market.
The hazards of fracking to children’s health include:
• Toxic air pollution by volatile organic compounds released from fracking wells such as benzene, ethyl-­benzene, hydrogen sulfide (H2S), n-­
hexane, and methane: Benzene and ethyl-­benzene are known human
carcinogens, H2S and n-­hexane are neurotoxicants, and methane is a
climate pollutant that contributes to greenhouse gas emissions.
• Traffic-­related air pollution resulting from the large volumes of diesel
truck traffic required to bring piping, chemicals, and water to drilling operations: Diesel exhaust contains coarse and fine particulates,
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), and formaldehyde, and
has been classified by the International Agency for Research on Cancer as a known human carcinogen.
• Water pollution by toxic chemicals: Leaks of toxic materials into waterways occur commonly during fracking operations; in addition, much
of the water injected into the wells returns to the surface containing
proprietary injected chemicals, along with high concentrations of salt
dissolved from underground deposits and naturally occurring radioactive materials. These chemicals have been shown to contaminate
both ground and surface waters. Water pollution is a particularly severe problem in arid regions with limited water supplies.
• Radon released from underground deposits: Radon has been shown
to contaminate air near wellheads, and high concentrations of radon
have been identified in shipped gas. Additional, nonchemical hazards of fracking include incessant noise, high risk of vehicular injury
to children from fast-­moving heavy trucks on poorly maintained
rural roads, societal disruption in rural communities, and extensive
degradation of the environment.

Lead

See Chapter 761.

Mercury

See Chapter 760.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 759 u Chemical Pollutants
Asbestos

Between 1947 and 1973, asbestos was sprayed as insulation on classroom walls and ceilings in approximately 10,000 schools in the United
States. It was also widely utilized in homes as pipe insulation and in
floor tiles. Subsequent deterioration or unsafe removal of this asbestos
can release asbestos fibers into the air. Asbestos is not a health hazard
so long as it is intact, but once it becomes airborne, it can be inhaled
by children to produce adverse health effects. Asbestos is a human
carcinogen, and the two principal cancers caused by asbestos are lung
cancer and mesothelioma. U.S. federal law requires that all schools be
inspected periodically for asbestos and that the results be made public.
Removal by an EPA-­certified contractor is required only when asbestos
is visibly deteriorating or is within the reach of children. In most cases,
placement of barriers (drywall walls or drop ceilings) provides appropriate protection.

Pesticides

Pesticides are a diverse group of chemicals used to control insects, weeds,
fungi, and rodents, and are used in large quantities in agriculture, homes,
schools, parks, gardens, and recreational areas. Children are at risk of
exposure when pesticides are used inside or outside in places where
children live, learn, and play, and in rural areas they can be exposed to
pesticide drift from fields that have been sprayed. Children employed in
agriculture or living in migrant farm camps are at risk of direct exposure
to pesticides. Diet is another major route of exposure because children are
exposed to residual levels of multiple pesticides on fruit and vegetables,
especially fruits and vegetables imported from countries where pesticide
use is heavier than in the United States. Children can be acutely overexposed to pesticides and clinically evident poisoning results. High-­dose
exposure to neurotoxic insecticides such as the organophosphate and carbamate pesticides can cause acute neurotoxicity. Both classes of pesticides
act through inhibition of acetylcholinesterase and are responsible for the
largest number of acute poisoning cases. Symptoms include meiosis, excess
salivation, abdominal cramping, vomiting, diarrhea, and muscle fasciculation. In severe cases, the child may experience loss of consciousness, cardiac arrhythmias, and death by respiratory arrest. The war gas sarin is an
organophosphate. See Chapter 94 for treatment of poisoning from drugs,
chemicals, and plants.
Pesticides can also cause a range of chronic toxic effects that include
polyneuropathy and central nervous system (CNS) dysfunction
(organophosphates), hormonal disruption and reproductive impairment (DDT, kepone, dibromochloropropane), cancer (aldrin, dieldrin, chlorophenoxy herbicides [2,4,5-­T]), and pulmonary fibrosis
(paraquat).
Prenatal exposure to the organophosphate pesticide chlorpyrifos at levels that produce no evident toxicity in pregnant women has
been associated with neurodevelopmental disability in children with
reduced cognitive function (lowered IQ), disordered executive function, and functional and anatomic changes in the brain discernible by
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
Two classes of pesticides of concern are synthetic herbicides and
the neonicotinoid insecticides. Herbicides account for about 48%
of total pesticide use, and their application is increasing. A major
use of herbicides is in production of genetically modified (GM) food
crops, mainly corn and soybeans that are engineered to be tolerant
to glyphosate (Roundup), the most used herbicide worldwide. Herbicides can be sprayed on herbicide-­resistant crops throughout the
growing season, and glyphosate-­
resistant, “Roundup-­
Ready,” GM
crops account for more than 90% of all corn and soybeans planted in
the United States.
Studies of agricultural workers exposed occupationally to glyphosate
and other herbicides have found evidence for increased incidence of
non-­Hodgkin lymphoma. On the basis of these studies and convergent
results from toxicologic studies, the International Agency for Research
on Cancer has determined that glyphosate is a “probable human carcinogen.” Measurable levels of glyphosate metabolites are commonly
detected in the urine of Americans.
The neonicotinoids are a class of neurotoxic pesticides developed
in the 1980s to replace the organophosphates and carbamates. Use

4425

of neonicotinoids rose dramatically in the early 2000s, and the neonicotinoid insecticide, imidacloprid, is one of the most widely used
insecticides in the world. A growing body of evidence indicates that
neonicotinoids are toxic to bees and other pollinators at concentrations found currently in agricultural areas, and neonicotinoids are
suspected of contributing to bee colony collapse disorder. In 2020, the
EPA proposed a number of restrictions and precautions for neonicotinoid use. More than a dozen states have also introduced legislation
limiting neonicotinoids, and several European countries have banned
or severely restricted their use. Almost no information is available on
the possible developmental or pediatric toxicity of the neonicotinoids.
This is another example of a new pesticide in widespread use without
prior testing for health impacts on children.
Children’s exposures to pesticides can be reduced by minimizing
applications to lawns, gardens, schools, and playgrounds; adapting
techniques of integrated pest management; and reducing pesticide
applications to food crops. Pediatricians and parents can look to
resources including the National Pesticide Information Center (NPIC)
and the EPA for guidance on integrated pest management and safer
use of pesticides in and around the home. Consumption of organic
produce has been shown to dramatically reduce pesticide exposure in
school-­age children. Families can choose organic produce when available and cost-­competitive but should not avoid a diet rich in fruits and
vegetables if organic options are not feasible.

Persistent Organic Pollutants: Per-­and Poly-­
fluoroalkyl Substances and Chlorinated Hydrocarbons

Per-­and Poly-­fluoroalkyl Substances. Per-­and poly-­fluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are a group of synthetic chemicals that have been used in
industrial processes and consumer products because they are resistant to
water and heat, and do not break down in the environment. In addition,
they can move through soil into drinking water sources and can build up
in fish and wildlife (bioaccumulate). They may make clothing stain resistant and also reduce friction. PFAS are also known as “forever chemicals”
due to their persistence in the environment, as their strong carbon-­fluorine
chain is resistant to degradation. NHANES has documented universal
exposure to some PFAS due to their ubiquity in consumer products (e.g.,
nonstick pans, take-­out food containers, water-­resistant textiles) and the
food chain. PFAS have also been detected in drinking water sources (both
municipal systems and private wells) across the United States. In March
2023, the EPA proposed a draft of enforceable maximum contaminant
levels (MCLs) for six different PFAS chemicals in public drinking water
systems; the final regulations are expected by the end of 2023. Several states
have enacted their own MCLs for various PFAS compounds; these state
MCLs will have to become at least as stringent as the federal MCLs (once
finalized).
Ingestion of contaminated food, water, or household dust is the
major route of exposure to these chemicals. PFAS can cross the placenta and enter breastmilk. The half-­life in the body can be days to
decades, depending on the specific PFAS compound. Epidemiologic
studies suggest a link between PFAS exposure and increased cholesterol levels, altered liver function tests, decreased antibody response to
childhood vaccines, increased risk of preeclampsia/high blood pressure during pregnancy, and cancer (kidney and testicular). Health outcome studies in highly exposed communities are ongoing.
Chlorinated Hydrocarbons. The chlorinated hydrocarbons are a
large and diverse class of chemicals that include insecticides (DDT),
plastics (polyvinyl chloride), electrical insulators (PCBs), and solvents
(trichloroethylene). Highly toxic chlorinated dioxins and furans are
formed during synthesis of chlorinated herbicides or as by-­products
of plastic combustion. These materials are widely dispersed and highly
persistent in the environment. Dioxins and furans are known human
carcinogens. Brominated flame retardants are used in carpets, furniture, and computers and are environmentally persistent.
The embryo, fetus, and young child are at particularly high risk of
injury from halogenated hydrocarbons. All of these compounds are
lipid soluble. They readily cross the placenta, and they accumulate
in breast milk. Intrauterine exposure to PCBs and brominated flame
retardants has been linked to persistent neurobehavioral dysfunction

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4426 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
in children manifested by cognitive impairment (reduced IQ), shortening of attention span, and behavioral disorders.
Consumption of fish from contaminated waters is a major source
of children’s exposure to PCBs. Children can be exposed in utero or
through breast milk. To protect children and pregnant women against
PCBs in fish, government agencies have issued advisories concerning
fish consumption for certain lakes and rivers. Combustion of medical
wastes containing polyvinyl chloride and the use of chlorine to bleach
paper products are major preventable sources of environmental dioxin
emissions and should be discouraged. Older fluorescent light ballasts
that were installed decades ago in schools in the United States are
another source of PCB exposure. PCB-­containing ballasts should be
removed from schools as soon as possible to prevent environmental
contamination. Removal must be performed by trained workers.

Endocrine Disruptors

Endocrine disruptors are synthetic chemicals that mimic, block, or
alter the actions of normal hormones such as estrogen, testosterone,
growth hormone, insulin, and thyroid hormone. Synthetic endocrine
disruptors are manufactured in volumes of millions of pounds per
year. They include phthalates, bisphenol A, perchlorate, certain pesticides, brominated flame retardants, certain metals, and dioxins. These
chemicals are widespread today in consumer products such as soaps,
shampoos, perfumes, and plastics. They are widely disseminated in the
environment and encountered in air, food, and drinking water.
Exposures to endocrine disruptors in early human development
are especially hazardous. Even extremely low-­dose exposures during critical early periods can lead to lasting impairments in organ
function and to increased risk of disease. Reproductive effects are one
consequence of early life exposures to endocrine disruptors. Endocrine disruption is implicated in the epidemiologic observations of
a trend toward earlier thelarche and menarche in females, with rising rates of testicular cancer and hypospadias, and with diminishing sperm counts. Among the most clearly documented reproductive
effects of early life exposures to endocrine disruptors are adenocarcinoma of the vagina in women and cryptorchidism in men whose
mothers took diethylstilbestrol (DES). Another well-­
documented
effect is shortening of the anogenital distance, a measure of in utero
feminization, in infant males whose mothers had elevated exposures
to phthalates during pregnancy.
Early life exposures to endocrine disruptors can have adverse effects on
brain development. Prenatal exposure to low molecular weight phthalates
is associated with shortening of attention span in children 4-­9 years old,
as well as with increased risk for autistic behaviors. Prenatal exposure to
bisphenol A has also been linked to behavioral anomalies.
Endocrine disruptors have been reported to have adverse impacts
on lipid metabolism and to increase the risk for obesity. Higher urinary levels of bisphenol A are associated with obesity-­related outcomes, such as cardiovascular disease, in a cross-­sectional analysis of
NHANES 2003-­2004 data in adults.
Early life exposures to endocrine disruptors, most notably DDT, are
linked with increased risk for cancer. A long-­term epidemiologic study
of women in California found that those who were exposed in utero
to high levels of DDT have increased risk for breast cancer in adult life
40-­50 years later.

Environmental Carcinogens

Leukemia and brain cancer, the two most common forms of pediatric malignancy in the United States, both increased in incidence
from 1972 to 2018, despite declining mortality. The cumulative
increase in incidence for childhood leukemia was more than 20%,
and for brain and CNS cancer more than 40%. In the same time
period, testicular cancer in young men, ages 15-­30 years, more
than doubled in incidence and is occurring at younger ages. These
increases are too rapid to be of genetic origin and are not likely due
to better diagnostic capabilities. They are most probably the result
of still undefined exposures in the environment. Cancer is now the
second-­leading cause of death in American children, surpassed
only by injuries.

Children may be exposed to carcinogenic pollutants in utero or after
birth. Children appear more sensitive than adults to certain chemical carcinogens and also to ionizing radiation (see Chapter 758). The
potential for chemical carcinogenesis in utero was initially recognized
with the discovery that clear cell adenocarcinoma of the vagina could
develop in young women who were exposed in utero to DES.
Carcinogenesis may be associated with exposures in the home and
community. Children of asbestos workers and children who have
grown up near asbestos plants have been found to have an elevated
incidence of mesothelioma. Children who attended elementary school
in communities containing synthetic rubber plants have been shown
to be at increased risk of leukemia as a result of their exposure to
1,3-­butadiene, a known human carcinogen and a major component of
synthetic rubber. Children who grow up on farms have elevated rates
of leukemia; pesticides are suspected of playing an etiologic role. Intrauterine exposure to trichloroethylene via contaminated drinking water
has been associated with an increased incidence of leukemia among
females living near an industrial facility and industrial waste site.

Routes of Exposure

Transplacental. Heavy metals such as lead and mercury, fat-­soluble

compounds such as PCBs and DDT, and endocrine disruptors such
as phthalates, readily cross the placenta. They may have serious and
irreversible toxic effects on the developing nervous, endocrine, and
reproductive organs, even at very low levels. The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists have recognized the hazards of environmental exposures during pregnancy and provide detailed guidance
for counseling to reduce these exposures in their 2021 statement Reducing Prenatal Exposure to Toxic Environmental Agents (Table 259.2).
Water. Approximately 200 chemicals have been detected at various
levels in water supplies including contaminants like lead, solvents, pesticides, and emerging chemicals like PFAS. Lead is an especially common
contaminant. Water supplies are generally lead-­free at the source but can
become contaminated by lead that dissolves from lead pipes and from
lead-­containing plumbing fixtures. Lead is especially likely to dissolve
from pipes and plumbing when the water is acidic, as happened in Flint,
Table 759.2  Toxic Chemicals or Pollutants and Reported
Association with Adverse Reproductive
Health Outcomes*
CHEMICAL OR POLLUTANT
WITH REPORTED ADVERSE
ASSOCIATION

POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECT

Antineoplastic drugs, bisphenol
A (BPA), cigarette smoke,
ethylene oxide, formaldehyde,
polybrominated diphenyl ether
(PBDE) flame retardants, solvents

Infertility and miscarriage

Air pollutants from fracking,
ambient air pollutants,
antineoplastic drugs,
cigarette smoke, ethylene
oxide, formaldehyde,
perfluorochemicals (PFAS),*
pesticides, phthalates, PBDEs,
toluene

Preterm birth and low
birthweight

Ambient air pollutants, BPA, lead,
mercury, pesticides, phthalates,
PBDE flame retardants,
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs)

Neurodevelopmental
impairment

*Associations noted are from reports of animal and limited human studies. Although
there are reported associations between exposures and adverse obstetric outcomes,
an association does not necessarily mean that the exposure is a cause of the
outcome. More research is needed to understand if there is causality and, if so, at
what level of exposure or use of a specific product.
Modified from American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists’ Committee on
Obstetric Practice. Reducing prenatal exposure to toxic environmental agents: ACOG
Committee Opinion, Number 832. Obstet Gynecol. 2021;138(1):e40–e54. Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 759 u Chemical Pollutants
Michigan, in 2014. The highest levels of lead occur in water that has been
standing in lead pipes overnight. It is wise therefore to run water for 2-­3
minutes each morning before making up infant formula. Solvents and
components of gasoline such as methyl tertiary-­butyl ether and benzene
are commonly encountered in groundwater. Chemical contaminants
from gas drilling can contaminate water in areas where fracking is taking
place. Herbicides, such as glyphosate and atrazine, are commonly found
contaminants in drinking water in agricultural areas.
In the United States, the EPA regulates approximately 90 drinking
water contaminants including organic chemicals, inorganic chemicals, radionuclides, and infectious agents in public water systems. The
municipal water systems are responsible for ensuring that the regulated
contaminants are below MCLs and will notify customers of any exceedance and steps to address the issue. Those families using private wells,
however, are responsible for testing their water on a regular basis. Families with well water can be directed to the EPA private well website or
their local health department for guidance on the recommended tests.
Air. Vehicular emissions are the major source of urban air pollution, notably ground-­
level ozone and particulate matter. Diesel
exhaust is a human carcinogen. Coal-­fired power plants are another
major source of outdoor air pollution. In rural areas, wood smoke
can contribute to air pollution. Pediatricians and parents can follow local air quality alerts that include recommendations to reduce
risk especially for sensitive groups (airnow.gov). Children living
in the vicinity of smelters and chemical production plants can be
exposed to toxic industrial emissions such as lead, benzene, and
1,3-­butadiene. Specific information about toxic air pollution release
in a community can be obtained via the Toxics Release Inventory
(www.epa.gov/toxics-­release-­inventory-­tri-­program).
Food. Many chemicals are intentionally added to food to improve
appearance, taste, texture, or preservation, but many such chemicals
have been poorly tested for potential toxicity. Residues of many pesticides are found in both raw and processed foods. Levels of pesticides
are lower in organic produce than in conventionally grown fruits and
vegetables. Children who consume organic produce have substantially
lower urinary pesticide levels than children who eat conventional produce. Elevated levels of methylmercury can be found in large predator
fish such as swordfish, shark, king mackerel, and tuna sushi; families
should be encouraged to follow fish advisories. Baby foods can contain
trace amounts of metals, and rice and rice-­based products (especially
those made of brown rice) can have inorganic arsenic.
Breast Milk. Breast milk provides many benefits to infants including protection from illness, reduction in allergic diseases like asthma,
and reduced risk of obesity, among many others. Breast milk can also
be a route of exposure to environmental chemicals including fat-­
soluble persistent organic pollutants, pesticides, and metals. In almost
all situations, the benefits of breastfeeding outweigh the risks of these
exposures, and numerous professional organizations support breast
milk as the first choice for infant feeding. In addition, chemical regulation can further reduce unnecessary exposure through this route.
Work Clothes. Illnesses in children sometimes may be traced
to contaminated dust from parents’ work clothes; toxicity from lead,
beryllium, dioxin, organophosphate pesticides, and asbestos has
occurred. Such exposure (termed fouling the nest) can be prevented by
providing facilities at work for changing and showering. If facilities are
not available, caregivers can be advised to change clothes and shoes
before returning home and wash work clothes separately from household laundry. Some work activities and hobbies that occur at home can
also expose children to toxins including metals like lead and solvents.
School. Children may be exposed in schools, kindergartens, and
nurseries to lead paint, molds, asbestos, tobacco smoke, pesticides, and
hazardous arts and crafts materials. Substantial opportunities for prevention exist in the school environment, and pediatricians are often
consulted for advice. The EPA has school related environmental health
materials (www.epa.gov/schools) that can be shared with stakeholders.
Child Labor. Four to five million children and adolescents in the
United States work for pay, and child labor is widespread around the
world. Working children are at high risk of physical trauma and injury.
They also may be exposed to a wide range of toxic chemicals, including

4427

pesticides in agriculture and lawn work, asbestos in construction and
building demolition, and benzene in pumping gasoline.

THE PHYSICIAN’S ROLE

Pediatricians have time and again played key roles in the initial recognition of diseases caused by toxic chemicals. Every pediatrician needs to be
an “alert clinician” open to the possibility of discovering new diseases in
children caused by hazardous exposures in the environment. In considering the origins of noninfectious disease, pediatricians should ask about the
home environment, parental occupation, unusual exposures, and neighborhood factories. An environmental cause is particularly likely when several unusual cases of disease or constellations of findings occur together.
Any adolescent with a traumatic injury may have been injured at work.
The history is the single most important instrument for obtaining information on environmental exposures (Table 759.3). Information about current and past exposures (including questions about work and travel to or
residence in developing countries) should be sought routinely for every
new patient. The age of the patient can help focus questions and provide
anticipatory guidance on key exposures of concern, such as screening
for common sources of lead exposure in young children. Patients with
asthma should be evaluated for exposure to common allergens (mold,
cockroaches, dust mites) and irritants (tobacco smoke, strong odors).
Children with neurodevelopmental disorders should be assessed for pica
and other behaviors that increase their risk of toxic exposures. Consider
targeted environmental health history questions in patients with illness of
unclear causation. Changes in patterns of exposure or new exposures may
be especially important. If suspicious information is elicited, more detailed
follow-­up should be pursued. Referral to a state or local health department
or to a Pediatric Environmental Health Specialty Unit may be indicated
(https://www.pehsu.net/). Accurate diagnosis of an environmental cause
of disease can lead to better care of sick children and prevention of disease
in other children.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

759.1 Tobacco
Judith A. Groner
Cigarette smoking is the single most preventable cause of morbidity
and mortality, contributing to over 480,000 annual deaths in the United
States. The most common reason that people smoke is nicotine addiction, and people who start smoking at an earlier age are more likely to
develop a severe addiction than those who start when they are older. In
2022, 4.5% of middle school students and 16.5% of high school students
reported current tobacco use (see Chapter 157.2). While youth use a variety of tobacco products, e-­cigarettes are the most common. E-­cigarettes
work by heating liquid to produce an aerosol that is then inhaled into the
lungs; this process is called vaping. While the long-­term health effects
of vaping are still being evaluated, the 2019 E-­cigarette or Vaping Use-­
Associated Lung Injury (EVALI) epidemic drew attention to the dangers
associated with e-­cigarette use (see Chapter 450).

COMPOSITION OF SECONDHAND SMOKE AND
TOXICITIES

Along with active tobacco use, secondhand tobacco smoke (SHS)
exposure is a very serious health hazard for both children and adults.
SHS is a mixture of approximately 7,000 chemicals and is made up of
the mainstream smoke exhaled by the smoker and side-­stream smoke
expelled from the end of a lit tobacco product. At least 70 carcinogens
have been identified in SHS, along with 250 chemicals that are toxic to
the CNS, immune system, heart, and liver.
SHS also contains particulate matter, which is an independent health
hazard. Particulate matter is microscopic solid and liquid matter suspended in air, which can be inhaled and enter the circulation. The most
studied of these include polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and
the tobacco-­specific nitrosamines, which are both carcinogenic. Most
particulate matter in side-­stream smoke is unfiltered by the smoker

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4428 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
Table 759.3  Clinical Tools for Incorporating Environmental Health into Patient Care
Tips for implementing a focused environmental health history:

Resources and tools for clinical practice:

1.	Age: Patient age can help direct screening questions and
anticipatory guidance on key exposures of concern, such as
lead screening questions for young children. Refer to American
Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) Bright Futures or the Pediatric
Environmental Health Toolkit for age-­specific information.
2.	Location: Local environmental conditions can help direct
environmental guidance. For example, in rural communities with
high prevalence of private wells for drinking water, families can be
counseled on the importance of routine well water testing.
3.	Symptoms: Consider environmental exposures in the differential
diagnosis. For example, carbon monoxide exposure should be on
the differential for families presenting with headaches and flulike
symptoms (afebrile, no cough).
4.	Asthma: assess for common environmental asthma triggers in the
home such as mold, cockroaches, mice, environmental tobacco
smoke, furry pets, cleaning chemicals, strong odors/fragrances
5.	Neurodevelopmental disorders: assess for pica behavior and
other risk factors that may increase the likelihood of exposures
(e.g., lead); assess for use of alternative medications

Environmental history forms:
• National Environmental Education Foundation (NEEF) has
a general environmental history and an asthma-­focused
environmental history (English and Spanish): www.neefusa.org/res
ource/pediatric-­environmental-­history
• World Health Organization (WHO) Paediatric Environmental
Health History (Green Page) provides a series of concise
questions to assess potential exposures: https://www.who.int/pub
lications/m/item/children-­s-­environmental-­record-­-­green-­page
Evidence-­based clinical resources:
• The Green Book: American Academy of Pediatrics. Pediatric
Environmental Health. 4th ed. Etzel RA, Balk SJ, eds. Elk Grove
Village, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics; 2019.
• Pediatric Environmental Health Specialty Unit (PEHSU). One
PEHSU is located in each of the 10 federal regions in the
United States. The PEHSUs provide online classroom materials,
resources, and access to network of experts in pediatric and
reproductive environmental health: www.pehsu.net
• The Pediatric Environmental Health Toolkit is an online clinical
tool that providers can use to access information on common
exposures, including identification of sources of exposure and
provision of targeted anticipatory guidance: https://peht.ucsf.e
du.
• Bright Futures provides guidance for well child care for children
and adolescents (includes key environmental anticipatory
guidance): https://brightfutures.aap.org/.
• American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG).
Reducing Prenatal Exposure to Toxic Environmental Agents: https
://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34259492/
Resources for patients:
• Prescriptions for Prevention are tools that link patients to
evidence-­based simple steps to reduce or prevent common
environmental exposures (English and Spanish): https://nyscheck.
org/rx
• National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS).
Environmental health topics: https://www.niehs.nih.gov/health/to
pics/index.cfm

Components of environmental health history (can be adapted
based on patient scenario):
General home health and safety:
• Age and condition of home
(lead paint in pre-­1978 home)
• Carbon monoxide and fire
alarms
• Heat and cooking sources
(stove ventilation, safe space
heater use)
• Tobacco smoke
• Radon (test basement and
first/second floors)
• Cleaning products-­safe
storage and use (e.g., bleach)
Common indoor allergens:
• Water leaks/mold
• Pests (cockroaches, mice) and
pesticide use

Water and food:
• Drinking water source (well
water requires routine testing)
• Fish advisories
(methylmercury) for pregnant
persons and children
• Fresh produce (rinse well
before eating)
• Rice-­based products (vary
grains to reduce arsenic
exposure)
Jobs and hobbies:
• Caregiver jobs (contaminant
transfer from clothing, shoes)
• Adolescent jobs (safety)
• Hobbies in the home (paints,
chemicals)
• Sun protection outdoors
• Noise from headphones, toys

and is in the submicron (<1 μm diameter) range, meaning that it is
classified as fine particulate matter. These are smaller than the particles in mainstream smoke and can penetrate deeper into the lungs,
resulting in higher toxicity through oxidative stress and inflammation.
Short-­and long-­term exposure to fine particulate matter contributes
to the aggravation of asthma and other respiratory diseases, lung and
other cancers, cardiovascular disease, and death.
SHS concentration in the indoor environment depends on the number
of cigarettes smoked in a period, the volume of the room, the ventilation
rate, and other processes that eliminate pollutants from the air. There are
multiple mechanisms by which SHS causes injury to the respiratory tract,
and injury to the cardiovascular system is due to endothelial cell dysfunction due to smoke exposure and its prothrombotic effects.

THIRDHAND SMOKE

Thirdhand smoke (THS) was defined in 2011 as consisting of the residual
tobacco smoke pollutants that remain on surfaces and in dust after tobacco
has been smoked. These toxins are reemitted into the gas phase or react
with oxidants and other compounds in the environment to yield secondary pollutants. These residual pollutants can be detected in the indoor
environment well after being generated. About half the particulate matter
from SHS is still airborne after 5-­6 hours. Many chemicals, such as nicotine and some PAHs, exist in both the gaseous and the particulate phase
of SHS. Classified as “semi-­volatile,” their ability to change form according to environmental conditions means that they remain detectable in the
indoor environment for longer periods after active smoking has ceased.
These components in dust and on surfaces can be ingested, inhaled, or

even absorbed through the skin. The health implications of THS are not
well understood, but there is growing evidence both in vitro and in vivo of
health harms of THS exposure, particularly respiratory symptoms. Young
children are at higher risk of health issues due to THS absorption because
of their hand to mouth behaviors, crawling near surfaces, time spent in the
home, and increased respiratory rate.

TOBACCO USE AND EXPOSURE IS A HEALTH RISK
DISPARITY

Tobacco use, and hence childhood exposure, is found disproportionately among socially disadvantaged low-­income populations, who can
least afford tobacco and SHS-­related illness and evidenced-­based treatment for nicotine addiction. There has been a profound decrease in
smoking rates among the middle and upper classes within the United
States since the 1960s (83% decrease), but the rate of decrease is much
less (39%) among lower income groups. The smoking rate for the overall U.S. population is approximately 12.5%, but it is as high as 32%
among adults with a high school equivalency degree. Because of these
disparities in smoking rates among adults, children born into low-­
income homes are more likely to be exposed to SHS. More than 38% of
U.S. children age 3-­11 years were exposed to tobacco smoke from 2017
to 2018, based on a biologic marker of exposure, serum cotinine levels.
Children from low-­income homes have the highest rates of biologically
measured SHS exposure; for every decrease in family income ratio,
serum cotinine levels increase by 1.18 ng/L among children. Having
a parent who smokes has also been shown to be an independent risk
factor for food insecurity in children.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 759 u Chemical Pollutants
MATERNAL SMOKING DURING PREGNANCY
AND TOBACCO SMOKE EXPOSURE DURING
PREGNANCY

The effects of maternal smoking on the fetus are profound and can be
divided into pregnancy-­related and long-­term effects. Fetal exposure is
one of the most important modifiable risk behaviors for childhood and
long-­term health.

Pregnancy-­Related Effects

Maternal smoking increases the risk of placenta-­associated complications
of pregnancy, with an increased rate of placental abruption and placenta
previa among maternal smokers. Both active maternal smoking and secondhand maternal tobacco smoke exposure have been shown to reduce
birthweight and to increase the risk of preterm birth. In utero tobacco
exposure from either maternal active tobacco product use or maternal SHS exposure increases the rate of stillbirth. Smoking both during
and after pregnancy is a risk factor for sudden infant death syndrome
(SIDS); one study found that any smoking during pregnancy was associated in a doubling of SIDS risk and that there was a linear correlation
between the average number of cigarettes smoked daily and an increased
risk for SIDS. These associations are modifiable by public policy. Several
countries in Europe have shown decreased perinatal complications after
comprehensive smoke-­free laws; within the United States, pregnancy
complications and SIDS are inversely related to tobacco taxation levels.

Long-­Term Effects

Maternal smoking in early pregnancy is considered causal for orofacial
clefts (Surgeon General Report 2014).
Both active smoking during pregnancy and SHS exposure of the
mother increases the child’s later risk of being overweight or obese.
This finding may appear surprising due to the long-­known relationship between smoking during pregnancy and low birthweight. This
relationship has been shown in multiple epidemiologic studies and is
robust to adjustment for potential confounders, such as parental body
mass index (BMI), breastfeeding, family diet, and lifestyle.
Maternal smoking during pregnancy has been associated with both an
increased risk of learning problems and neurobehavioral issues during
childhood. The adverse effects of prenatal smoking on child neurodevelopment include poor language development and reduction in cognitive
functioning. Prenatal exposure to smoking may also reduce the child’s
motor performance, mental development (measured by the Bayley Scales
of Infant Development), IQ scores, and language development through
age 3 years. This exposure may also increase the risks of several child
behavioral problems, including externalization of aggressive and hyperactive behavior, prolonged periods of verbal or physical aggression and
socially undesirable behavior (conduct disorder) throughout childhood,
and delinquency in later childhood. In one study, a dose-­response relationship with increasing severity of poor school performance was related
to the number of cigarettes the mother smoked during pregnancy.

Maternal Smoking During Pregnancy and Lung
Development

Smoking during pregnancy is associated with poor lung growth and
function in the offspring and with a greater risk for wheezing between
age 2-­4 years. According to the Surgeon General Report (2014), there is
sufficient evidence to consider this relationship to be causal.

POSTNATAL SECONDHAND SMOKE EXPOSURE—
EFFECTS ON THE CHILD
Respiratory

Children exposed to SHS have a higher rate of asthma prevalence and
greater asthma severity. The Surgeon General Report (2006) concluded
that there is a causal relationship between parental smoking and cough,
phlegm, wheezing, and breathlessness, along with asthma, among school-­
age children. Children with SHS exposure have a weakened response to
inhaled corticosteroids. Children with asthma who are SHS-­exposed are
more likely to have an acute care visit, an overnight hospital stay, and a
higher number of hospital admissions than children with asthma and
no SHS exposure. The rate of hospital readmissions for asthma has been

4429

associated with the level of the child’s saliva cotinine, a biomarker of smoke
exposure, and this is true even at very low levels of exposure.
Tobacco smoke exposure is a cause of lower respiratory tract infection in children. Findings of the Surgeon General in 2006 were updated
by a systemic review of parental and household smoking and risk of
lower respiratory tract infections in infancy in 2011. The strongest relationship was for bronchiolitis, where the risk of any household smoke
exposure was increased in the first two years of life.
SHS exposure during childhood increases the rate of middle ear disease, including acute, recurrent otitis media and chronic middle ear
effusion. The Surgeon General Report (2006) rated this evidence as
sufficient to infer a causal relationship between parental smoking and
middle ear disease in children.

Cardiovascular Effects

Tobacco smoke exposure during adulthood has been linked to an increased
risk of cardiovascular disease. Evidence links childhood exposure to findings of preclinical atherosclerosis. These include increased carotid intima-­
media thickness and decreased flow-­mediated dilation, both indirect tests
for preclinical changes leading to atherosclerosis during adulthood. Other
findings have included increased inflammation as measured by C-­reactive
protein, abnormal lipid profiles, higher blood pressure, and increased rates
of metabolic syndrome among SHS-­exposed children and youth.

Infection

Childhood exposure to SHS is related to increased rates of invasive
meningococcal disease in children less than 5 years old. SHS in the
home doubled the risk of invasive meningococcal disease with some
evidence of a dose-­response relationship. The strongest effect was seen
in children under 5 years, with SHS exposure more than doubling the
rate of meningococcal disease. This relationship was seen both with
prenatal smoking and postnatal exposure.
SHS exposure has also been shown to increase the severity of influenza among children hospitalized for the disease. Children with SHS
exposure were 4.7 times more likely to be admitted to intensive care
and had a 70% longer length of stay than nonexposed children, after
controlling for multiple potential confounding factors.

Healthcare Utilization

Children and teens age 3-­19 years who are SHS-­exposed had higher
healthcare utilization compared with nonexposed peers based on an
analysis of NHANES data from 2009–2012. Children with high SHS
exposure based on serum cotinine were almost three times more
likely to have an overnight hospital stay and two times as likely to
have a higher number of total hospital admissions as children with no
exposure.

Special Vulnerable Pediatric Populations

There is evidence that SHS exposure exacerbates disease processes
among children with significant chronic health conditions. Children with sickle cell disease who are exposed to SHS have increased
morbidity, specifically increased rates of emergency department
visits, and hospitalizations for vasoocclusive crisis and acute chest
syndrome (see Chapter 511.1). In addition, tobacco smoke exposure is also associated with pulmonary function abnormalities
among children with sickle cell disease, independent of their baseline disease.
Children with cystic fibrosis (CF) are another vulnerable population in which SHS exposure presents an additive threat to overall health. Core health issues for this group of children include
problems with growth, lung function, and pulmonary infections
(see Chapter 454). SHS-­exposed children with CF had decreased
growth between 4 and 12 months compared with non–SHS exposed
infants. Furthermore, tobacco smoke exposure was associated with
increased bronchodilator responsiveness and air trapping, and with
increased methicillin-­resistant Staphylococcus aureus and anaerobic
growth on respiratory culture. Tobacco smoke exposure can be considered a modifiable risk factor for children with sickle cell disease
and CF.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4430 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
TREATMENT FOR TOBACCO USE AND
SECONDHAND TOBACCO SMOKE EXPOSURE

There is no risk-­free level of youth tobacco use or SHS exposure. Thus the
best method to treat tobacco use and SHS exposure is to eliminate this
exposure by helping adolescents and their caregivers quit smoking. Methods to reduce exposure such as “smoking outside” or wearing a “smoking
jacket” have not been shown to eliminate biochemically confirmed SHS
exposure. A meta-­analysis of six controlled trials aimed specifically at SHS
exposure reduction for children (not parental smoking cessation) showed
some reduction in tobacco smoke pollution post intervention. However,
all homes had significant tobacco-­related air pollution at the end of the
study period.
The pediatric office has long been considered an excellent venue for
pediatricians to screen for youth tobacco use as well as children’s SHS
exposure and to intervene with youth and their caregivers. The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends that providers:
1.	Inquire about tobacco use and tobacco smoke exposure as part of
health supervision visits and visits for diseases that may be caused or
exacerbated by tobacco smoke exposure.
2.	Include tobacco use prevention as part of anticipatory guidance.
3.	Address parent/caregiver tobacco dependence as part of pediatric
healthcare.
4.	Offer tobacco dependence treatment and/or referral to adolescents
who want to stop smoking.
The United States Preventative Services Task Force also recommends that
primary care clinicians provide school-­age children and adolescents who
have not started to use tobacco with interventions (including education or
brief counseling) to prevent initiation of tobacco use. The “Ask-­Counsel-­
Treat” (ACT) model developed by the AAP provides tips on addressing
youth tobacco use in the office (available at https://www.aap.org/en/patient-­
care/tobacco-­control-­and-­prevention/youth-­tobacco-­cessation/tobacco-­
use-­considerations-­for-­clinicians/); it is recommended that screening
begin at age 11. The Clinical Effort Against Secondhand Smoke Exposure
(CEASE) is a program that trains pediatricians and their office staff to systematically provide cessation counseling and interventions to caregivers
who smoke. The CEASE model is (1) ask if anyone in the home or who
cares for the child smokes; (2) assist the patient or caregiver with quitting
by providing brief counseling, pharmacotherapy, or appropriate referrals;
and (3) refer the smoker to evidence based cessation treatments, including telephone-­based Quitlines or Text to Quit services. The CEASE model
(found at https://www.massgeneral.org/children/cease-­tobacco) involves
training pediatricians to provide smoking cessation pharmacotherapy to
caregivers who wish to quit smoking; it includes tools to both identify caregivers who smoke and facilitate pediatric healthcare providers’ delivery of
counseling, medications, and referral for tobacco treatment.
Despite the AAP recommendations for pediatricians to incorporate
these methods into practice, a meta-­analysis in 2016 of controlled trials in
routine healthcare settings of child SHS exposure reduction did not show
an intervention effect. However, three controlled trials of maternal postpartum smoking relapse prevention did demonstrate beneficial outcomes
of the intervention.
Decreasing smoking initiation among youth will prevent the children
of the future from SHS exposure. Ninety percent of smokers initiate
use before 19 years of age, and 80% of youth who are smokers persist in
smoking in adulthood. Of those, half will die earlier than their nonsmoking peers. After many years of individual states working to enact stricter
tobacco laws, new federal legislation known as Tobacco 21 was signed in
2019 that raised the minimum age for sale of tobacco products from 18
to 21 years nationwide. By increasing the age of tobacco purchase to 21
years, there is hope that a whole generation of smoking can be prevented.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

759.2 Marijuana Smoke Exposure
Karen M. Wilson
Unlike tobacco smoke exposure, which has long been recognized as
a cause of morbidity and mortality among nonsmokers, marijuana

smoke exposure is far less well studied. In 2021, 13.2 million persons
age 12 years or older used marijuana on a daily or almost daily basis in
the past 12 months, an increase from the 5.7 million daily or almost
daily users in 2013 (see Chapter 157.3). The use of marijuana has been
increasing in both acceptability and legality in the past 20 years. Current use of marijuana is more common among males and younger
adults (18-­34 years vs 35 years or older), and those with less than a high
school degree. As of 2023, 38 states allow the legal use of marijuana for
medical reasons, and 24 states plus Washington DC and Guam have
legalized its recreational use. Analysis of poison control center calls for
exposure to marijuana for children under 6 years of age showed an
increase of 148% from 2006 to 2013; from 4.2/1 million children to
10.4/1 million. Tobacco-­smoking parents with young children residing
in the home are four times more likely to use marijuana as compared
with nontobacco smoking parents. About 38% of young children in the
United States are exposed to tobacco smoke, compared to an estimate
of 15% of children exposed to marijuana smoke. Studies examining the
presence of biomarkers of marijuana smoke exposure have found an
exposure prevalence of 16% in young children hospitalized for bronchiolitis in Colorado, and 21% in children 0-­3 years being seen at a
clinic in New York City.

COMPONENTS OF MARIJUANA SMOKE

While marijuana can also be aerosolized or ingested as hash oil or leaf,
combusted marijuana is still the most common form. A recent analysis of data from the U.S. National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey (NHANES) finds that daily marijuana users have higher levels
of combustion biomarkers (e.g., volatile organic compounds and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) than nonusers. In addition to the
particulates and other chemicals of combustion, marijuana comprises
two primary active chemicals: Δ9-­tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and
cannabidiol (CBD). Exposure to combustion products likely extends to
adjacent nonusers, as has been shown for tobacco smoke. Most states
with legal marijuana use do not have any restrictions on combustible
marijuana use in the presence of children.

IMPACT OF MARIJUANA SMOKE EXPOSURE

While there is clear research on the dangers of secondhand tobacco
smoke (SHS), there have been very few studies examining the impact
of marijuana smoke exposure. Secondhand marijuana smoke contains particulate matter that is known to be harmful when inhaled,
in addition to other toxic and carcinogenic chemicals such as volatile
organic compounds, PAHs, and aromatic amines. Studies in adults
have demonstrated that it is possible to get a “contact high” from
intense exposure. Even brief exposures have been found to impair
vascular endothelial function in animal models. Children can be
exposed to secondhand and thirdhand marijuana smoke when parents or other household contacts smoke indoors, similar to children
living with tobacco smokers. Also similar to tobacco, children could
be exposed to marijuana smoke through incursions from neighboring apartments; in a New York City sample, 31% of parents reported
marijuana incursions, whereas 34% reported tobacco incursions.
Neonates can be exposed to marijuana prenatally or through breast
milk. Prenatal exposure has been linked to growth restriction and
neonatal intensive care admissions, as well as behavioral issues such
as impulsivity. Prenatal exposure has also been linked to impaired
executive functioning in young adulthood. One study examined
the role of indoor cannabis smoke and health; although they found
increased particulates in homes with cannabis use, there was no statistically significant difference in health outcomes.

TREATMENT

In the absence of convincing data showing that marijuana is not harmful, parents should be counseled to avoid exposing their children to
marijuana smoke, to lock marijuana in a safe place out of reach of any
children, to avoid edibles in appealing or non–child proof packaging, and to be cautious about their own level of impairment if they do
choose to use legal marijuana.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 760 u Heavy Metal Intoxication 4431

Chapter 760

Heavy Metal Intoxication
Prashant V. Mahajan
Lead, mercury, arsenic, and cadmium, four of the World Health Organization’s (WHO) “Ten chemicals of greatest public health concern,”
are the heavy metals posing the greatest threats to humans. The most
prevalent of these exposures is lead (see Chapter 761).
Heavy metal intoxication results in multiorgan toxicity through
widespread disruption of vital cellular functions. A meticulous history of environmental exposure may be necessary to correctly identify
heavy metals as the source of the protean manifestations associated
with such exposure. Arsenic exposure can occur from contaminated
food or water; globally, more than 140 million people are estimated
to be chronically exposed to drinking water containing high arsenic
levels. Mercury exposure occurs primarily through food; fish is a major
source of methyl mercury exposure.

ARSENIC

Arsenic is a metalloid that exists in four forms: elemental arsenic, arsine
gas, inorganic arsenic salts (pentavalent arsenate form or trivalent arsenite form), and organic arsenic compounds. Toxic manifestations are
higher in the more soluble and higher-­valence compounds. Arsine gas
is the most toxic form of arsenic. Mass poisonings from exposure to
arsenic have occurred throughout history, including one in 1998 in
Wakayama, Japan, in which 70 people were poisoned. Children may be
poisoned after exposure to inorganic arsenic found in pesticides, herbicides, dyes, homeopathic medicines, and certain contaminated folk
remedies from China, India, and Southeast Asia (see Chapter 94). Soil
deposits contaminate artesian well water. Groundwater contamination
with arsenic is a common problem in developing countries and has
been reported to be a common well contaminant in many areas of the
United States as well (Fig. 760.1). The Southwest has the highest arsenic
concentrations in the country with more than 16% of sampled wells
exceeding the maximum contaminant level. Food products (e.g., rice,

organic brown rice syrup, fruit juices) cooked in contaminated water
may absorb arsenic, thus concentrating it in the food (Fig. 760.2). The
WHO and United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) have
set 10 μg/L as the upper limit of safety. In many parts of Asia and South
America, this limit is frequently exceeded. Arsenic concentrations in
a quarter of the wells in Bangladesh exceed 50 μg/L, and 35-­77 million of the 125 million inhabitants of Bangladesh regularly consume
arsenic-­
contaminated water. Occupational exposure may occur in
industries involved in the manufacturing, mining, smelting, or refining of glass, pottery, electronic and semiconductor components, and
lasers. Although arsenic is no longer produced in the United States, it
is produced in many countries and is imported into the United States
for industrial use. Organic arsenic compounds may be found in seafood, pesticides, and some veterinary pharmaceuticals. In contrast to
mercury, the organic forms of arsenic found in seafood are nontoxic.

Pharmacokinetics

Elemental arsenic is insoluble in water and bodily fluids, and thus is insignificantly absorbed and nontoxic. Inhaled arsine gas is rapidly absorbed
through the lungs. The inorganic arsenic salts are well absorbed through
the gastrointestinal tract, lungs, and skin. The organic arsenic compounds
are well absorbed through the gastrointestinal tract. After acute exposure,
arsenic initially is bound to the protein portion of hemoglobin in the red
blood cells (RBCs) and rapidly distributed to all tissues. Inorganic arsenic is
methylated and is eliminated predominantly by the kidneys, with approximately 95% excreted in the urine and 5% excreted in the bile. Most of the
arsenic is eliminated in the first few days, with the remainder slowly excreted
over a period of several weeks. Arsenic concentrates in hair, nails, and skin.
Arsenic can also accumulate in the fetus, as it can cross the placenta.
Measurement of the distance of Mees lines (transverse white striae on
the nail) from the nailbed can provide an estimate of time of exposure
(nails grow at the rate of 0.4 mm/day) (Fig. 760.3).

Pathophysiology

After exposure to arsine gas, absorbed arsine enters RBCs and is oxidized to arsenic dihydride and elemental arsenic. Complexing of these
derivatives with red cell sulfhydryl groups results in cell membrane
instability and massive hemolysis. The inorganic arsenic salts poison enzymatic processes vital to cellular metabolism. Trivalent arsenic binds to sulfhydryl groups, resulting in decreased production of

Arsenic concentrations in at least 25% of
samples exceed:
50 mg/L

5

1

10

3

Insufficient data

Fig. 760.1 U.S. Geological Survey map of
arsenic in groundwater. Groundwater may
also contain elevated concentrations of arsenic from agricultural runoff, contamination from runoff from wood preservatives
containing arsenic, improperly disposed
arsenical chemicals, or mining. For the latest on
the US Geological survey: https://www.usgs.
gov/mission-areas/water-resources/science/
arsenic-and-drinking-water#overview.
(Modified from Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry: Arsenic toxicity.
What Are the Routes of Exposure for Arsenic?
Fig 1. https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/csem/
arsenic/what_routes.html.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Mean concentrations of urinary
inorganic arsenic and its major
metabolites MMA and DMA (µg/L)

4432 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
14.0
12.84 (±10.6)
n = 24
12.0

8.0
6.0

11.19 (±5.73)
n = 102

8.86 (±4.60)
n = 112

10.0

ORGAN SYSTEM

EFFECTS OF ARSENIC

Gastrointestinal system

Submucosal vesicles, watery or bloody
diarrhea, severe hematemesis,
pancreatitis, jaundice, toxic hepatitis

Cardiovascular system

Reduced myocardial contractility,
prolonged QT intervals,
tachyarrhythmias, torsades de pointes,
pericarditis
Vasodilation, hypotension, shock

Kidneys

Hematuria, proteinuria, oliguria, renal
failure

Nervous system

Toxic encephalopathy with seizures,
headache, cerebral edema, and coma
Chronic exposure: peripheral painful
sensorimotor neuropathy, paresthesias

Hematologic and
lymphatic system

Anemia, leukopenia, and
thrombocytopenia; acute hemolysis with
arsine gas, basophilic stippling

Liver

Fatty degeneration with central necrosis

Skin

Desquamation, alopecia, hyperkeratosis,
nail changes (Mees lines), brown
pigmentation
Chronic exposure: hyperkeratosis,
hyperpigmentation

Teratogenic

Neural tube defects in the fetus

Oncologic

Urologic cancer, other malignancies

9.18 (±4.95)
n = 76

8.00 (±4.65)
n = 137

7.07 (±3.36)
n = 115
6.68 (±3.42)
n = 1522

Table 760.1  Effects of Arsenic on Organ Systems

4.0
0

0.5

1

2

3

4-6

7+

Servings of cooked rice (1/4 cup) per day

Fig. 760.2 Mean concentrations of urinary inorganic arsenic and its

major metabolites monomethylarsonic acid (MMA) and dimethylarsinic
acid (DMA) by categories of rice intake in children ages 6-­17, National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 2003-­2008, excluding subjects with recent seafood consumption. (From Lai PY, Cottingham KL, Steinmaus C, et al. Arsenic and rice: Translating research to
address health care providers’ needs. J Pediatr. 2015;167[4]:797–803.
Fig. 1.)

Fig. 760.3 Mees lines. Transverse white bands are clearly visible on
the nails. (From Chauhan S, D’Cruz S, Singh R, et al. Mees’ lines. Lancet.
2008;372[9647]:1410.)

adenosine triphosphate through the inhibition of enzyme systems such
as the pyruvate dehydrogenase and α-­ketoglutarate complexes. Pentavalent arsenic may be biotransformed to trivalent arsenic or substituted for phosphate in the glycolytic pathway, resulting in uncoupling
of oxidative phosphorylation.

Clinical Manifestations

Arsine gas is colorless, odorless, nonirritating, and highly toxic. Inhalation causes no immediate symptoms. After a latent period of 2-­24 hours,
exposed individuals experience massive hemolysis, malaise, headache,
weakness, dyspnea, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, hepatomegaly,
pallor, jaundice, hemoglobinuria, and renal failure (Table 760.1). Acute
ingestion of arsenic produces gastrointestinal toxicity within minutes
to hours and is manifested as nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and
diarrhea. Hemorrhagic gastroenteritis with extensive fluid loss and
third spacing may result in hypovolemic shock. Cardiovascular toxicity includes QT interval prolongation, polymorphous ventricular
tachycardia, congestive cardiomyopathy, pulmonary edema, and cardiogenic shock. Acute neurologic toxicity includes delirium, seizures,
cerebral edema, encephalopathy, and coma. Lethal doses of arsenates
are 5-­50 mg/kg; lethal doses of arsenites are <5 mg/kg.

Late sequelae include hematuria, proteinuria, and acute kidney
injury. A delayed sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy may appear
days to weeks after acute exposure, secondary to axonal degeneration.
Neuropathy manifests as painful dysesthesias followed by diminished
vibratory, pain, touch, and temperature sensation; decreased deep tendon reflexes; and in the most severe cases, an ascending paralysis with
respiratory failure mimicking Guillain-­Barré syndrome (see Chapter
656). Adult survivors of infant arsenic poisoning experience higher
mortality from disorders of the nervous system compared with adults
without such exposure.
Subacute toxicity is characterized by prolonged fatigue, malaise,
weight loss, headache, chronic encephalopathy, peripheral sensorimotor neuropathy, leukopenia, anemia, thrombocytopenia, chronic
cough, and gastroenteritis. Mees lines in the nails become apparent 1-­2
months after exposure in approximately 5% of patients. Dermatologic
findings include alopecia, oral ulceration, peripheral edema, a pruritic
macular rash, and desquamation.
Chronic arsenic toxicity causes significant morbidity in children
resulting in skin lesions, lung disease, and deficits in intellectual function. Chronic exposure to low levels of arsenic is usually from environmental or occupational sources. Over the course of years, dermatologic
lesions develop, including hyperpigmentation, hypopigmentation,
hyperkeratoses (especially on the palms and soles), squamous and
basal cell carcinomas, and Bowen disease (cutaneous squamous cell
carcinoma in situ). Encephalopathy and peripheral neuropathy may
be present. Hepatomegaly, hypersplenism, noncirrhotic portal fibrosis, and portal hypertension occur. Blackfoot disease is an obliterative
arterial disease of the lower extremities associated with chronic arsenic exposure that has been described in Taiwan. Carcinogenicity of
chronic arsenic exposure is reflected in increased rates of cancers of
the skin, lung, liver, bladder, and kidney as well as of angiosarcomas.
Arsenic is carcinogenic, possibly through epigenetic dysregulation. The
effects of prenatal exposure to arsenic are uncertain but may include
low birthweight.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 760 u Heavy Metal Intoxication 4433
Laboratory Findings

The diagnosis of arsenic intoxication is based on characteristic clinical
findings, a history of exposure, and elevated urinary arsenic values, the
last of which confirm the exposure. A spot urine arsenic level should
be determined for symptomatic patients before chelation, although initially the result may be negative. Because urinary excretion of arsenic is
intermittent, definitive diagnosis depends on a 24-­hour urine collection.
Concentrations greater than 50 μg/L in a 24-­hour urine specimen are
consistent with arsenic intoxication (Table 760.2). Urine specimens must
be collected in metal-­free containers. Ingestion of seafood containing
nontoxic arsenobetaine and arsenocholine can cause elevations of urinary arsenic. Blood arsenic levels rarely are helpful because of their high
variability and the rapid clearance of arsenic from the blood in acute
poisonings. Elevated arsenic values in the hair or nails must be interpreted cautiously because of the possibility of external contamination.
Abdominal radiographs may demonstrate ingested radiopaque arsenic.
Later in the course of illness, a complete blood cell count may show
anemia, thrombocytopenia, and leukocytosis, followed by leukopenia,
karyorrhexis, and basophilic stippling of RBCs. The serum concentrations of creatinine, bilirubin, and transaminases may be elevated; urinalysis may show proteinuria, pyuria, and hematuria; and examination
of the cerebrospinal fluid may show protein elevations.

MERCURY

Mercury exists in three forms: elemental mercury, inorganic mercury
salts, and organic mercury (Table 760.3). Elemental mercury is present in thermometers, sphygmomanometers, barometers, batteries, gold
or silver smelting processes, and some latex paints produced before
1991. Workers in industries producing these products may expose
their children to the toxin when mercury is brought home on contaminated clothing. Vacuuming of carpets contaminated with mercury and
breaking of mercury fluorescent light bulbs may result in elemental
mercury vapor exposure. Severe inhalation poisonings have resulted
from attempts to separate gold from gold ore by heating mercury
and forming a gold-­mercury amalgam. Elemental mercury has been
used in folk remedies by Asian and Mexican populations for chronic
stomach pain, by Latin Americans and Caribbean natives in occult
practices, and as a skin-­lightening agent. Dental amalgams containing
elemental mercury release trace amounts of mercury. An expert panel
for the National Institutes of Health concluded that existing scientific
evidence does not indicate that dental amalgams pose a health risk and
should not be replaced merely to decrease mercury exposure. A 2009
WHO expert panel concluded that a global near-­term ban on amalgam
would be problematic for public and dental health. However, this committee recommended that alternatives to amalgam should be sought as
part of a phase-­out of the use of mercury-­containing amalgams.
Inorganic mercury salts are found in pesticides, disinfectants, antiseptics, pigments, dry batteries, and explosives and as preservatives
in some medicinal preparations. Organic mercury in the diet, especially fish containing methyl mercury, is a major source of mercury
exposure among the general population. Industries that may produce
mercury-­containing effluents include chlorine and caustic soda production, mining and metallurgy, electroplating, chemical and textile
manufacturing, paper and pharmaceutical manufacturing, and leather
tanning. Mercury compounds in the environment are methylated to

methyl mercury by soil and water microorganisms. Methyl mercury in
the water rapidly accumulates in fish (swordfish, king mackerel, fresh
tuna, tile fish, shark) and other aquatic organisms, which are in turn
consumed by humans. To address concerns that maternal consumption of large quantities of fish during pregnancy may expose the fetus
to concentrations of mercury with adverse consequences, the longitudinal Seychelles Child Development Study has been ongoing since the
late 1980s. The first cohort of the study involved nearly 800 mother–
child pairs, with subsequent cohorts enrolled. Despite a high maternal
fish intake (mean of 12 fish meals per week), follow-­up of children at
least through 9 years of age has revealed no consistent adverse developmental effects. Well-­known large outbreaks of methyl mercury intoxication include the incidents in Japan in the 1950s (Minamata disease,
from consumption of contaminated seafood) and in Iraq in 1971 (from
consumption of grain treated with a methyl mercury fungicide).
Thimerosal is a mercury-­containing preservative used in some vaccines. Thimerosal contains 49.6% mercury by weight and is metabolized to ethyl mercury and thiosalicylate. During an ongoing review
of biologic products in response to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Modernization Act of 1997, the FDA determined that
infants who received thimerosal-­containing vaccines at multiple visits might have been exposed to more mercury than recommended by
federal guidelines. As a precautionary measure, the American Academy of Pediatrics, American Academy of Family Physicians, Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, and U.S. Public Health
Service issued a joint recommendation in 1999 that thimerosal be
removed from vaccines as quickly as possible. In the United States, thimerosal has been removed from all vaccines in the recommended childhood immunization schedule. Infants and children who have received
thimerosal-­containing vaccines do not need to undergo blood, urine,
or hair testing for mercury because the concentrations of mercury
would be quite low and would not require treatment. The larger risks
of not vaccinating children far outweigh any known risk of exposure
to thimerosal-­containing vaccines. Studies do not demonstrate a link
between thimerosal-­containing vaccines and autism spectrum disorders (see Chapter 58), and no evidence supports a change in the standard of practice regarding administration of thimerosal-­containing
vaccines in areas of the world where they are used. A rise in blood
mercury levels following a single dose of hepatitis vaccine was seen in
preterm infants, but the clinical significance is unknown.

Pharmacokinetics

Inhaled elemental mercury vapor is 80% absorbed by the lungs and is
distributed rapidly to the central nervous system because of its high
lipid solubility. The elemental mercury is oxidized by catalase to the
mercuric ion, which is the reactive form that causes cellular toxicity.
Elemental mercury liquid is poorly absorbed from the gastrointestinal
tract, with less than 0.1% being absorbed. The half-­life of elemental
mercury in the tissues is approximately 60 days, with most of the excretion occurring in the urine.
Inorganic mercury salts are approximately 10% absorbed from the
gastrointestinal tract and cross the blood-­brain barrier to a lesser
extent than elemental mercury. Mercuric salts are more soluble than
mercurous salts and therefore produce greater toxicity. Elimination
occurs primarily in the urine, with a half-­life of approximately 40 days.

Table 760.2  Acceptable and Toxic Levels of Arsenic and Mercury
ARSENIC

MERCURY

Molecular weight

74.9 Da

200.59 Da

Acceptable blood level

<5 μg/L (<0.665 nmol/L)

<10 μg/L (<50 nmol/L)

Acceptable urine level

<50 μg/L (<6.65 nmol/L) 24-­hr urine sample

<20 μg/L (<100 nmol/L)

Intervene at blood level
Intervene at urine level

>35 μg/L (>175 nmol/L)
>100 μg/L (>13.3 nmol/L) 24-­hr urine sample

>150 μg/L (>750 nmol/L)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4434 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
Table 760.3  Differential Characteristics of Mercury Exposure
ELEMENTAL

INORGANIC (SALT)

ORGANIC (ALKYL)

Primary route of exposure

Inhalation

Oral

Oral

Primary tissue distribution

CNS, kidney

Blood (transient, acute), kidney,
CNS (delayed)

CNS, kidney, liver, blood, hair

Clearance

Kidney, GI

Kidney, GI

Methyl: GI
Aryl: kidney, GI

CLINICAL EFFECTS
CNS

Tremor

Tremor, erethism (irritability)

Paresthesias, ataxia, tremor, tunnel
vision, dysarthria

Pulmonary

+++

—

—

Gastrointestinal

+

+++ (caustic)

+

Renal

+

+++ (acute tubular necrosis)

+

Acrodynia

+

++

—

Therapy

BAL, succimer

BAL, succimer

Succimer (early)

+, mild; ++, moderate; +++, severe; BAL, British antilewisite (also known as dimercaprol); CNS, central nervous system; GI, gastrointestinal.
From Sue YJ. Mercury (heavy metals). In: Nelson LS, Howland MA, Lewin NA, et al., eds. Goldfrank’s Toxicologic Emergencies, 11th ed. New York: McGraw-­Hill; 2019: Table 95.3.

Methyl mercury is the most avidly absorbed of the organic mercury
compounds, with approximately 90% absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. The lipophilic, short-­chain alkyl structure of methyl mercury
allows it to distribute rapidly across the blood-­brain barrier and placenta. Methyl mercury is approximately 90% excreted in the bile, with
the remainder being excreted in the urine. The half-­life is 70 days.

Pathophysiology

After absorption, mercury is distributed to all tissues, particularly the
central nervous system and kidneys. Mercury reacts with sulfhydryl,
phosphoryl, carboxyl, and amide groups, resulting in disruption of
enzymes, transport mechanisms, membranes, and structural proteins.
Widespread cellular dysfunction or necrosis results in the multiorgan
toxicity characteristic of mercury poisoning.

Clinical Manifestations

Five syndromes describe the clinical presentation of mercury poisoning. Acute inhalation of elemental mercury vapor results in rapid
onset of cough, dyspnea, chest pain, fever, chills, headaches, and visual
disturbances. Gastrointestinal findings include metallic taste, salivation, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Depending on the severity of
the exposure, the illness may be self-­limited or may progress to necrotizing bronchiolitis, interstitial pneumonitis, pulmonary edema, and
death from respiratory failure. Younger children are more susceptible
to pulmonary toxicity. Survivors may demonstrate restrictive lung disease. Renal dysfunction and neurologic disturbances (ataxia, persistent
weakness, emotional lability) may develop subacutely. Chronic exposure to volatilized elemental mercury in dental amalgams has not been
found to be of any clinical significance.
Acute ingestion of inorganic mercury salts (typically secondary to
ingestion of a button battery) can manifest in a few hours as corrosive
gastroenteritis, signified by metallic taste, oropharyngeal burns, nausea, hematemesis, severe abdominal pain, hematochezia, acute tubular
necrosis, cardiovascular collapse, and death.
Chronic inorganic mercury intoxication produces the classic triad
consisting of tremor, neuropsychiatric disturbances, and gingivostomatitis. The syndrome may result from long-­term exposure to elemental mercury, inorganic mercury salts, or certain organic mercury
compounds, all of which may be metabolized to mercuric ions. The
tremor starts as a fine intention tremor of the fingers that is abolished
during sleep but that may later involve the face and progress to choreoathetosis and spasmodic ballismus. Mixed sensorimotor neuropathy and visual disturbances may also be present. The neuropsychiatric
disturbances include emotional lability, delirium, headaches, memory

loss, insomnia, anorexia, and fatigue. Renal dysfunction ranges from
asymptomatic proteinuria to nephrotic syndrome.
Acrodynia, or pink disease, is a rare idiosyncratic hypersensitivity
reaction to mercury that occurs predominantly in children exposed to
mercurous powders. The symptom complex includes generalized pain,
paresthesias, and an acral (hands, feet) rash that may spread to involve
the face. The rash typically is red-­pink, papular, pruritic, and painful; it
may progress to desquamation and ulceration. Morbilliform, vesicular,
and hemorrhagic variants have been described. Other important features include anorexia, apathy, photophobia, and hypotonia, especially
of the pectoral and pelvic girdles. Irritability, tremors, diaphoresis,
insomnia, hypertension, and tachycardia may be present. Some cases
initially were diagnosed as pheochromocytoma. The outcome is good
after removal of the source of mercury exposure.
Methyl mercury intoxication (also known as Minamata disease
after the widespread mercury poisoning that occurred at Minamata
Bay in Japan in people who had ingested contaminated fish) manifests
as delayed neurotoxicity that appears after a latent period of weeks to
months. It is characterized by ataxia; dysarthria; paresthesias; tremors;
movement disorders; impairment of vision, hearing, smell, and taste;
memory loss; progressive dementia; and death. Infants exposed in
utero are the most severely affected, with low birthweight, microcephaly, profound developmental delay, cerebral palsy, deafness, blindness,
and seizures. Although there is significant residual morbidity from
methyl mercury neurotoxicity, observations on long-­term follow-­up of
children exposed in Iraq reveal complete or partial resolution in most
cases.

Laboratory Findings

The diagnosis of mercury intoxication is based on characteristic clinical findings, a history of exposure, and elevation of whole blood or
urine mercury values, the last of which confirms the exposure. Thin-­
layer and gas chromatographic techniques can be used to distinguish
organic from inorganic mercury. Blood should be collected in special
tubes for trace elements from laboratories that capably perform those
tests. Levels <10 μg/L in whole blood and <20 μg/L in a 24-­hour urine
specimen are considered normal (see Table 760.2). Although blood
mercury levels may reflect acute exposure, they decrease as mercury
redistributes into the tissues. Urine mercury levels are most useful for
identifying long-­term exposures, except in the case of methyl mercury, which undergoes minimal urinary excretion. Urinary mercury
levels are used in monitoring efficacy of chelation therapy, whereas
blood levels are used primarily in monitoring organic mercury poisonings. Hair analysis for mercury is not reliable because hair reflects

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 760 u Heavy Metal Intoxication 4435
both endogenous and exogenous mercury exposure (hair avidly binds
mercury from the environment). Abdominal radiographs may demonstrate ingested radiopaque mercury.
Urinary markers of early nephrotoxicity include microalbuminuria, retinol-­
binding protein, β2-­microglobulin, and N-­acetyl-­
β-­d-­
glucosaminidase. Early neurotoxicity may be detected with
neuropsychiatric testing and nerve conduction studies, whereas severe
central nervous system toxicity is apparent on CT or MRI.

TREATMENT OF ARSENIC AND MERCURY
INTOXICATION

The principles of management for arsenic and mercury intoxication
include prompt removal from the source of poisoning, aggressive stabilization and supportive care, decontamination, and chelation therapy
when appropriate. Once the diagnosis is suspected, the local poison
control facility should be contacted, and care coordinated with physicians who are familiar with the management of heavy metal poisoning.
Supportive care for patients exposed to arsine gas requires close
monitoring for signs of hemolysis, including evaluation of the peripheral blood smear and urinalysis. Transfusion of packed RBCs may
be necessary, as may administration of intravenous fluids, sodium
bicarbonate, and mannitol to prevent renal failure secondary to the
deposition of hemoglobin in the kidneys. After inhalation of elemental mercury vapor, patients require careful monitoring of respiratory
status, which may include pulse oximetry, arterial blood gas analysis,
and chest radiography. Supportive care involves administration of
supplemental oxygen and, in severe cases, intubation and mechanical
ventilation.
Acute ingestion of inorganic arsenic and mercury salts results in
hemorrhagic gastroenteritis, cardiovascular collapse, and multiorgan
dysfunction. Fluid resuscitation, pressor agents, and transfusion of
blood products may be required for management of cardiovascular
instability. Severe respiratory distress, coma with loss of airway reflexes,
intractable seizures, and respiratory paralysis are indications for intubation and mechanical ventilation. Renal function must be monitored
carefully for signs of renal failure and the need for hemodialysis.
Gastrointestinal decontamination after ingestion of inorganic arsenic and mercury salts has not been well studied. Because of the corrosive effects of these compounds, induced emesis is not recommended,
and endoscopy may be considered before gastric lavage. Arsenic and
mercury are not well adsorbed to activated charcoal, but its use may be
helpful if coingestants are suspected. Whole bowel irrigation is used to
remove any radiopaque material remaining in the gastrointestinal tract.
Chelation for acute arsenic and mercury poisoning is most effective
when administered as soon as possible after exposure. Chelation should
be continued until 24-­hour urinary arsenic or mercury levels return to
normal (<50 μg/L for arsenic and <20 μg/L for mercury), the patient is
symptom-­free, or the remaining toxic effects are believed to be irreversible. The efficacy of chelation in long-­term exposures is reduced because
heavy metal in the tissue compartment is relatively nonexchangeable
and some degree of irreversible toxicity has already occurred.
Dimercaprol, also known as 2,3-­dimercaptopropanol or British antilewisite (BAL), is the chelator of choice for a patient who cannot tolerate oral therapy, as often is true for critically ill patients and after
ingestion of the corrosive inorganic arsenic and mercury salts. Dimercaprol is available in 3-­mL ampules at a concentration of 100 mg/mL
for deep intramuscular (IM) injection. It is formulated in a peanut oil
and benzyl benzoate suspension; as such, it is not suitable for patients
with peanut allergy. For arsenic poisoning, the recommended regimen
of dimercaprol is 2.5 mg/kg IM q4 hours for six doses, then every 6
hours for four doses, then every 8 hours for three doses, then every
12 hours for two doses, followed by once daily for 10 days. For severe
arsenic poisoning, the dose of dimercaprol is increased to 3.5-­5 mg/
kg; the same dosing interval is followed. The dose of dimercaprol for
inorganic mercury poisoning is 5 mg/kg every 4 hours IM for 24-­48
hours, and then 2.5 mg/kg IM q12 hours for 10 days. The dimercaprol–heavy metal complex is excreted in the urine and bile. A period of

Table 760.4  Potential Strategies for Reducing Exposure
of Arsenic in Rice
1.	Diversify the diet
• Eat a well-­balanced diet and a variety of grains†,‡,§
• Identify children at risk for high consumption of rice and rice
products (e.g., gluten-­free diets, highly allergic)
2.	Consider alternatives to rice for first food
• Start infants on barley, oats, or other grains†,‡
• If rice cereal must be used for infants, limit to one serving per
day§
3.	Adopt strategies that help minimize exposure
• Rinse rice in a colander before cooking§
• Cook rice like pasta, with plenty of extra water§
• Choose lower-­arsenic varieties of rice (e.g., basmati)§
• Avoid or limit use of rice milk or other rice beverages for
infants‡ and children under 5 yr old§,¶
• Read labels of processed foods: choose alternatives to foods
sweetened with brown rice syrup or thickened with rice
products
4.	Regulatory action
• Federal agencies should establish regulatory limits for arsenic
content in rice and rice products§
†U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
‡American Academy of Pediatrics.
§Consumer Reports.
¶United Kingdom Food Standard Agency.
From Lai PY, Cottingham KL, Steinmaus C, et al. Arsenic and rice: translating research
to address health care providers’ needs. J Pediatr. 2015;167(4):797–803.

5 days between courses of chelation is recommended. Adverse effects
of dimercaprol include pain at the injection site, hypertension, tachycardia, diaphoresis, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, a burning sensation in the oropharynx, and a feeling of constriction in the chest.
Dimercaprol may cause hemolysis in glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase–deficient individuals. It is important to note that dimercaprol
is contraindicated for chelation of methyl mercury because dimercaprol redistributes methyl mercury to the brain from other tissue sites,
resulting in increased neurotoxicity.
Oral chelating agents are used to replace the painful dimercaprol injections when the patient is stable enough to tolerate oral therapy and prolonged chelation is necessary. Succimer, also known as
2,3-­dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA), is an orally administered water-­
soluble derivative of dimercaprol. DMSA is available in 100 mg capsules. The recommended regimen of DMSA for both arsenic and
mercury poisoning is 10 mg/kg orally every 8 hours for 5 days followed
by 10 mg/kg orally every 12 hours for 14 days. The DMSA–heavy metal
complex is excreted in the urine and bile. A period of 2 weeks between
courses of chelation is recommended. Mild adverse effects include
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, loss of appetite, and transient elevations
in liver enzyme levels. DMSA also may cause hemolysis in glucose-­6-­
phosphate dehydrogenase–deficient patients.
d-­Penicillamine is an orally administered chelator that has been
used in the past for less-­severe mercury poisoning or as an adjunct to
dimercaprol therapy in arsenic poisoning. Its use is largely restricted
because of the potential for significant leukopenia, thrombocytopenia,
and proteinuria along with the improved tolerability of succimer.
Patients with ingestion of elemental mercury require no follow-­up
unless there is an underlying disease that decreases the gastrointestinal transit time. Serial abdominal radiographs to document the progression of the metal are recommended. Acute inhalation of mercury
fumes and ingestion of inorganic mercury require hospitalization to
monitor the respiratory and gastrointestinal status, respectively. Therapeutic abortion may be considered in pregnant patients because of the
teratogenic effect of mercury.
Strategies to reduce arsenic exposure in rice are noted in Table 760.4.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4436 Part XXXII u Environmental Health

Chapter 761

Lead Poisoning
Morri Markowitz
Lead is a metal that exists in four isotopic forms. Clinically it is purely a
toxicant; no organism has an essential function that is lead dependent.
Chemically its low melting point and ability to form stable compounds
have made it useful in the manufacture of hundreds of products; this
commercial attractiveness has resulted in the processing of millions of
tons of lead ore, leading to widespread dissemination of lead in the
human environment.
The blood lead level (BLL) is the gold standard for determining
risk of health effects. The threshold level at which lead begins to cause
biochemical, subclinical, or clinical disturbance remains to be determined. In 2021, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
designated 3.5 μg/dL as the “reference value based on the 97.5th percentile of the population of US children aged 1-­5 years.” It is the BLL that
identifies the 2.5% of children with the highest BLLs. As a measure
of the distribution of BLLs in young American children rather than
a toxicity threshold, this number will change in a manner dependent
on the epidemiology of BLLs. Surveillance by the CDC has shown that
the prevalence of elevated BLLs has declined markedly. Approximately
500,000 U.S. children ages 1-­5 years currently have BLLs ≥3.5 μg/dL.
Fortunately, children with levels high enough to be life-­threatening
(>100 μg/dL) are rarely seen in the United States, though deaths continue to occur in other areas of the world. Although BLL ≥3.5 μg/dL is
stated as a reference value, it is likely that clinicians and departments of
health will consider this a threshold for action.

PUBLIC HEALTH HISTORY

In the late 1970s, nearly all preschool-­age children in the United States
had BLLs above the current reference value of 3.5 μg/dL. Over the next
25 years, government regulations resulted in the significant reduction
of three main contributors to lead exposure by means of (1) the elimination of the use of tetraethyl lead as a gasoline additive, (2) the banning of lead-­containing solder to seal food-­and beverage-­containing
cans, and (3) the application of a federal rule that limited the amount of
lead allowed in paint intended for household use to less than 0.06% by
weight (further reduced by the Consumer Product Safety Commission
to 0.009% in 2008). Factors identified by the CDC in the late 1970s that
indicate increased risk of lead poisoning, in addition to preschool age,
include low socioeconomic status; living in older housing, built primarily before 1960; urban location; and Black race. Another high-­risk
group that has been identified consists of recent immigrants from less
wealthy countries, including adoptees. These risk factors largely persist
currently, as indicated by an analysis of over 1 million BLLs obtained
from U.S. children between October 2018 and February 2020 and analyzed in a commercial lab. In addition, these data indicated that over
half of the children still have measurable BLLs, i.e., ≥1 μg/dL.
Progress is also being made globally. In Mexico, the introduction of
unleaded gasoline in 1990 was associated with a decline in BLLs among
first-­grade students, from 17 μg/dL in 1990 to 6.2 μg/dL in 1997. Algeria, the last country to use leaded gasoline for cars and trucks, phased
out its use in 2021. In Malta, after the import of red lead paint was
banned and the use of lead-­treated wood for fuel in bakeries was prohibited, mean BLLs of pregnant women and newborns decreased by
45%. After it was documented that children living in the neighborhood
of a battery factory in Nicaragua had a mean BLL of 17.2 μg/dL, but
children in the control community had a mean BLL of 7.4 μg/dL, the
factory was closed. Despite these advances, in 2021 the World Health
Organization (WHO), citing research for UNICEF by the Institute for
Health Metrics and Evaluation, estimated that 815 million children
globally may have elevated BLLs above 5 mg/dL. The majority live
in developing countries, where in some regions BLLs may be 10- to
20-fold higher than in developed countries.

Unfortunately, local lead-­related harms continue to occur. When the
water source for Flint, Michigan, was changed (2014) to the Flint River
and utilized a water treatment plant with poor corrosion control, the
lead level of Flint tap water increased, as did the BLLs of children <5
years of age. Flint is not unique; many other cities have lead pipes that
can result in water contamination. In 2021 the US government allocated $15 billion for lead pipe removal.
In 2010, the CDC and WHO identified numerous lead-­contaminated
villages in northern Nigeria. The grinding of ore to extract gold caused
widespread leaded dust dissemination. It is likely that hundreds of children died because of this activity, and all remaining children in some
of the villages assessed were lead poisoned, with 97% having a BLL ≥45
μg/dL, the threshold for chelation therapy in the United States. Unfortunately, such disasters continue to occur in Nigeria and neighboring
countries from similar metal extraction activities.

SOURCES OF EXPOSURE

Lead poisoning may occur in utero because lead readily crosses the
placenta from maternal blood. The spectrum of toxicity is similar to
that experienced by children after birth. The source of maternal blood
lead content is either redistribution from endogenous stores (i.e., the
mother’s skeleton) or lead newly acquired from ongoing environmental exposure.
Several hundred products contain lead, including paint, batteries,
cable sheathing, cosmetics, mineral supplements, plastics, toys (Table
761.1), and traditional medicines (Table 761.2). Major sources of exposure vary among and within countries; the major source of exposure
in the United States remains old lead-­based paint. Approximately 34.6
million homes, mainly built before 1950, have lead-­based paint (2021
estimate), of which the CDC has estimated that 22.3 million are in a hazardous state. As paint deteriorates, it chalks, flakes, and turns to dust.
Improper rehabilitation work of painted surfaces (e.g., sanding) can
result in dissemination of lead-­containing dust throughout a home. The
dust can coat all surfaces, including children’s hands. All of these forms
of lead can be ingested. If heat is used to strip paint, then lead vapor concentrations in the room can reach levels sufficient to cause lead poisoning via inhalation. There is an increased awareness that tap water in both
homes and schools may have substantial amounts of lead. The latter arose
from the discovery of contaminated water in most New York City public
schools. Moreover, this occurrence raised questions about the safety of
the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) lead-­in-­water-­standard
of 15 parts per billion (ppb; μg of Pb/L of water) that water distribution
companies must meet in at least 90% of homes in their service areas. This
standard was not based on achieving health safety but rather on what the
water companies felt was financially feasible. After review, in 2021 the
EPA recommended lowering the “trigger” level to 10 ppb. Breaching this
value requires water companies to prepare an intervention plan should
the level subsequently go over 15 ppb. It does not require action to reduce
the amount of lead in that water supply. Even 10 ppb is still much greater
than the 1 ppb recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics
as the limit for allowable lead in drinking water. It should be noted that
the EPA lead in water standard does not apply to schools, although many
states have set their own standards.
In other parts of the world, especially in poorer countries, additional
sources can be found. These include contaminated neighborhoods
as the result of car/truck battery lead recycling, aluminum cookware
made with recycled metals, spices, and traditional medicines.

METABOLISM

The nonnutritive hand-­to-­mouth activity of young children is the most
common pathway for lead to enter the body. In most cases, lead is
ingested either as a component of dust licked off of surfaces or in swallowed paint chips, through water contaminated by its flow through lead
pipes or brass fixtures, or from otherwise contaminated foods or liquids. Cutaneous contamination with inorganic lead compounds, such
as those found in pigments, does not result in a substantial amount
of absorption. Organic lead compounds, such as tetraethyl lead, may
penetrate through skin; however, these are rarely encountered.
The percentage of lead absorbed from the gut depends on several factors: particle size, pH, other material in the gut, and nutritional status of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 761 u Lead Poisoning
Table 761.1  Sources of Lead
Paint chips
Dust
Soil
Parent’s or household contact’s occupational exposure (auto repair,
smelting, construction, remodeling, plumbing, gun/bullet (firing
range) exposure, painting, e-­scrap)
Glazed ceramics
Herbal remedies (e.g., Ayurvedic medications)
Home remedies, including antiperspirants, deodorants (litargirio)
Jewelry (toys or parents’)
Stored battery casings or recycling (or living near a battery smelter)
Lead-­based gasoline (in aviation fuel for propeller planes)
Moonshine alcohol
Mexican candies; Ecuadorian chocolates
Ceremonial spices
Indoor firing ranges
Retained bullet fragments
Imported spices (svanuri marili, zafron, kuzhambu)
Lead-­based cosmetics (kohl, surma, kajal)
Lead plumbing (water)
Imported foods in lead-­containing cans
Domestic foods (applesauce pouches, others)
Imported toys
Home renovations
Antique toys or furniture
Kratom

Table 761.2  Cases of Lead Encephalopathy Associated
with Traditional Medicines by Type of
Medication

TRADITIONAL
MEDICAL SYSTEM

NO. (%) CASES
OF LEAD
ENCEPHALOPATHY

NO. (%) PEDIATRIC
CASES WITHIN
CAM SYSTEM OR
MEDICATION

Ayurveda

5 (7)

1 (20)

Ghasard

1 (1)

1 (100)

Traditional Middle
Eastern practices

66 (87)

66 (100)

Azarcon and Greta

2 (3)

2 (100)

Traditional Chinese
medicine

2 (3)

2 (100)

Total

76 (100)

72 (95)

CAM, Complementary and alternative medicines.
From Karri SK, Saper RB, Kales SN. Lead encephalopathy due to traditional medicines.
Curr Drug Saf. 2008;3:54–59.

essential elements. Large paint chips are difficult to digest and are mainly
excreted; this chemical characteristic of lead compounds is fortunate, as
a single chip may contain a potentially lethal dose of lead. Fine dust can
be dissolved more readily, especially in an acid medium. Lead eaten on
an empty stomach is better absorbed than that taken with a meal. The
presence of calcium and iron may decrease lead absorption by direct
competition for binding sites; iron (and probably calcium) deficiency
results in enhanced lead absorption, retention, and toxicity.
After absorption, lead is disseminated throughout the body via
blood. It circulates bound to erythrocytes; approximately 97–99% of
lead in blood is bound on or in the red blood cells. The plasma fraction is too small to be measured by conventional techniques employing
atomic absorption spectroscopy or anodic stripping voltammetry; it is
presumably the plasma portion that may leave the blood compartment
to enter cells and induce toxicity. Thus clinical laboratories report the
BLL, not the serum or plasma lead level. The increasing availability
and decreasing cost of inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry,
which is capable of measuring lead in ng/dL quantities, may eventually

4437

result in clinical availability of tools to measure plasma lead, a more
proximal measure to where toxicity is actually occurring.
Most retained lead accumulates in bone, where it resides for years.
But in all cells, lead has multiple effects. It binds to enzymes, particularly
those with available sulfhydryl groups, changing the contour and diminishing function. For example, three of eight enzymes in the ubiquitously
distributed heme pathway are susceptible to lead inhibitory effects. The
accumulation of excess amounts of heme precursors is also toxic. The
last enzyme in this pathway, ferrochelatase, enables protoporphyrin to
chelate iron, thus forming heme. Erythrocyte protoporphyrin (EP) levels higher than 35 μg/dL (laboratory dependent) are abnormal and are
consistent with lead poisoning, iron deficiency, or recent inflammatory
disease. Measurement of the EP level is thus a useful tool for monitoring
biochemical lead toxicity. EP levels begin to rise several weeks after BLLs
have reached 20 μg/dL in a susceptible portion of the population and are
elevated in nearly all children with BLLs higher than 50 μg/dL. A drop in
EP levels also lags behind a decline in BLLs by several weeks because it
depends on both cell turnover and cessation of further overproduction
by marrow red blood cell precursors. The test can be ordered either as
the free EP or the zinc protoporphyrin. Results are reported in μg/dL.
When reported in μmol/mmol this likely indicates that the analysis has
been standardized to a hematocrit of 45, an unwarranted assumption in
young children.
A second mechanism of lead toxicity works via its competition with
calcium. Many calcium-­binding proteins have a higher affinity for lead
than for calcium. Lead bound to these proteins may alter function,
resulting in abnormal intracellular and intercellular signaling. Neurotransmitter release is, in part, a calcium-­dependent process that is
adversely affected by lead.
Although these two mechanisms of toxicity may be reversible, a
third mechanism prevents the development of the normal tertiary
brain structure. In immature mammals the normal neuronal pruning process that results in elimination of multiple intercellular brain
connections is affected by lead. Failure to construct the appropriate
tertiary brain structure during infancy and childhood may result
in a permanent abnormality. In a longitudinal study of childhood
lead poisoning, MRI examinations of the participants when in their
20s found smaller areas of brain in the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus regions, areas involved in decision-­making and memory
formation.

CLINICAL EFFECTS

The BLL is the best-­studied measure of the lead burden in children.
Although subclinical and clinical findings correlate with BLLs in populations, there is considerable interindividual variability in this relationship. Lead encephalopathy is more likely to be observed in children
with BLLs higher than 100 μg/dL; however, one child with a BLL of 300
μg/dL may have no symptoms, whereas another with the same level may
be comatose. Susceptibility may be associated with polymorphisms in
genes coding for lead-­binding proteins, such as Δ-­aminolevulinic acid
dehydratase, an enzyme in the heme pathway.
Several subclinical effects of lead have been demonstrated in cross-­
sectional epidemiologic studies. Hearing and height are inversely
related to BLLs in children; in neither case, however, does the lead
effect reach a level that would bring an individual child to medical
attention. As BLLs increase in the study populations, more sound (at
all frequencies) is needed to reach the hearing threshold. Children with
higher BLLs are shorter than those with lower levels; for every 10 μg
increase in the BLL, the children are 1 cm shorter. Chronic lead exposure also may delay puberty.
Several longitudinal studies have followed cohorts of children for
decades after birth and examined the relationship between BLLs and
cognitive test scores over time. In general, there is agreement that BLLs,
expressed either as levels obtained concurrently with cognitive testing
or as a measure that integrates multiple BLLs drawn from subjects over
time, are inversely related to cognitive test scores. From these studies, no BLL above 0 μg/dL appears safe. On average, for each 1 μg/dL
elevation in BLL, the cognitive score is approximately 0.25-­0.50 points
lower, though the relationship is not linear across the BLL spectrum.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4438 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
Because the BLLs from early childhood are predictors of the cognitive
test results performed years later, this finding implies that the effects of
lead can be permanent.
The effect of in utero lead exposure is less clear. Scores on the Bayley
Scale of Mental Development were obtained repeatedly every 6 months
for the first 2 years of life in a cohort of infants born to middle-­class
families. Results correlated inversely with cord BLLs, a measure of in
utero exposure. However, after 2 years of age, all other cognitive tests
performed on the cohort over the next 10 years correlated with the
BLLs at age 2 years but not with cord BLLs, indicating that the effects
of prenatal lead exposure on brain function were superseded by early
childhood events and later BLLs. Later studies, performed in cohorts
of Mexican children monitored from the prenatal period, confirm the
association between in utero lead exposure and later cognitive outcomes. In these studies, maternal plasma lead levels, obtained especially during the first trimester, were more strongly associated with
cognitive scores in the offspring than with the traditionally measured
maternal whole BLLs.
Behavior also is adversely affected by lead exposure. Hyperactivity is noted in young school-­age children with histories of lead
poisoning or with concurrent elevations in BLL. Older children
with higher bone lead content are more likely to be aggressive and
to have behaviors that are predictive of later juvenile delinquency.
One report supports the concept of long-­term effects of early lead
exposure. In this longitudinal study, the mothers of a cohort were
enrolled during their pregnancies. BLLs were obtained early in
pregnancy, at birth, and then multiple times in the offspring during the first 6 years. The investigators report that the later relative
rate of arrests, especially for violent crimes, increased significantly
in relationship to the presence of these BLLs early in life. For every
5 μg/dL increase in BLL, the adjusted arrest rate was 1.40 for prenatal BLLs and 1.27 for 6-­year BLLs. Epidemiologic data support
the findings in this observational study. In an analysis that combined two national datasets, total annual leaded gasoline use (U.S.
Geological Survey) and total reported violent criminal acts (U.S.
Department of Justice), the amount of leaded gasoline used yearly
was found to be strongly associated with violent criminal behavior
with a lag time of 23 years; that is, early childhood exposure was
followed two decades later by violent behavior rising and falling in
close tandem. A similar association was found, this time between
urban air lead levels and later violent crime, with a similar best-­fit
model employing a lag of approximately 22 years.
An intervention study, in which children with moderate lead poisoning and initial BLLs of 20-­55 μg/dL were aggressively managed over
6 months, addressed the issue of the effects of treatment on cognitive
development. Components of treatment included education regarding sources of lead and its abatement, nutritional guidance, multiple
home and clinic visits, and for a subset, chelation therapy. Average
BLLs declined, and cognitive scores were inversely related to the
change in BLLs. For every 1 μg/dL fall in BLLs, cognitive scores were
0.25 point higher. A randomized placebo-­controlled treatment study
of 2-­year-­old children with initial BLLs of 20-­44 μg/dL that employed
the chelating agent succimer administered over 6 months found no
difference in mean cognitive scores at age 4 years. However, as in the
earlier treatment study, regression analysis did find an inverse relation
between change scores; that is, a change in BLLs was associated with an
inverse change in cognitive scores.
Whether the behavioral effects of lead are reversible is unclear. In
one small, short-­term study, 7-­year-­old hyperactive children with
BLLs in the 20s were randomly allocated to receive a chelating agent
(penicillamine), methylphenidate, or placebo. Teacher and parent
ratings of behavior improved for the first two groups but not the placebo group. BLLs declined only in the chelated group. Two-­year-­old
lead-­poisoned children enrolled in a placebo-­controlled trial of the
chelating agent succimer showed no mean difference in behavior at 4
or 7 years of age. However, mean BLLs were also not different in the
two groups at those ages.
These studies support the concept that early exposure to lead can
result in long-­term deficits in cognition and behavior; they also hold

out the possibility that reductions in lead burden may be associated
with improvement in cognitive test scores.

CLINICAL SYMPTOMS

Gastrointestinal symptoms of lead poisoning include anorexia,
abdominal pain, vomiting, and constipation, often occurring and
recurring over a period of weeks. Children with BLLs higher than 20
μg/dL are twice as likely to have gastrointestinal complaints as those
with lower BLLs. Central nervous system symptoms are related to
worsening cerebral edema and increased intracranial pressure. Headaches, change in mentation, lethargy, papilledema, seizures, and coma
leading to death are rarely seen at levels lower than 100 μg/dL but have
been reported in children with a BLL as low as 70 μg/dL. The last-­
reported death directly attributable to lead toxicity in the United States
was in 2006 in a child with a BLL of 180 μg/dL. There is no clear cutoff
BLL value for the appearance of hyperactivity, but it is more likely to be
observed in children who have levels higher than 20 μg/dL.
Other organs also may be affected by lead toxicity, but symptoms
usually are not apparent in children. At high levels (>100 μg/dL), renal
tubular dysfunction is observed. Lead may induce reversible Fanconi
syndrome. In addition, at high BLLs, red blood cell survival is shortened, possibly contributing to a hemolytic anemia, although most
cases of anemia in lead-­poisoned children are a result of other factors,
such as iron deficiency and hemoglobinopathies. Older patients may
develop peripheral neuropathy leading to wrist drop and foot drop, as
well as hypertension.

DIAGNOSIS
Screening

It is estimated that 99% of lead-­poisoned children are identified by
screening procedures rather than through clinical recognition of lead-­
related symptoms. Until 1997, universal screening by blood lead testing
of all children at ages 12 and 24 months was the standard in the United
States. Given the national decline in the prevalence of lead poisoning,
the recommendations have been revised to target blood lead testing
of high-­risk populations. High risk is based on an evaluation of the
likelihood of lead exposure. Departments of health are responsible for
determining the local prevalence of lead poisoning, as well as the percentage of housing built before 1950, the period of peak leaded paint
use. When this information is available, informed screening guidelines
for practitioners can be issued. For instance, in New York State, where
a large percentage of housing was built before 1950, the Department of
Health mandates that all children be tested for lead poisoning via blood
analyses. In the absence of such data, the practitioner should continue to
test all children at both 12 and 24 months. In areas where the prevalence
of lead poisoning and old housing is low, targeted screening may be
performed on the basis of a risk assessment. Three questions form the
basis of most published questionnaires (Table 761.3), and items that
are pertinent to the locale or individual may be added. If there is a
lead-­based industry in the child’s neighborhood, the child is a recent
immigrant from a country that until recently still permitted the use
of leaded gasoline, or the child has pica (pattern of eating non-­food
materials) or developmental delay, blood lead testing would be appropriate. All Medicaid-­eligible children should be screened by blood lead
testing. Venous sampling is preferred to capillary sampling because
the chances of false-­positive and false-­negative results are less with the
former. However, capillary screening can be performed rapidly in the
office with a point of care (POC) instrument; use of such instruments
in primary care offices substantially increases screening rates. Other
screening guidelines vary by federal, state, and even local governmental agencies. Contacting your local Department of Health is one way to
determine local primary care obligations.
The threshold for lead effects and the reference level for risk management purposes are not the same. Laboratory issues make the interpretation of values more difficult at low levels. Most labs achieve quality
control of ±2 μg/dL for reports of BLL, but federal regulations allow
laboratories that perform BLL testing to operate with an allowable error
of ±4 μg/dL. A capillary screening value ≥3.5 μg/dL requires a venous
sample for confirmation (Table 761.4). If the diagnostic (venous) test

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 761 u Lead Poisoning
Table 761.3  Minimum Personal Risk Questionnaire
1.	Does the child live in or regularly visit a house that was built
before 1950? (Include settings such as daycare, babysitter’s, or
relative’s home.)
2.	Does the child live in or regularly visit a house built before
1978 with recent (past 6 months) or ongoing renovations or
remodeling?
3.	Does the child have a sibling or playmate who has or did have
lead poisoning?
From Screening young children for lead poisoning. Guidance for state and local public
health officials. Atlanta: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1997.

Table 761.4  Recommended Schedule for Obtaining a
Confirmatory Venous Sample
BLOOD LEAD LEVEL (µg/dL)

TIME TO CONFIRMATION
TESTING*

≥3.5-­9

Within 3 mo

10-­19

Within 1 mo

20-­44

Within 2 wk

≥45

Within 48 hr

4439

Table 761.5  Schedule for Follow-­Up Blood Lead Testing

VENOUS BLOOD LEAD
CONCENTRATIONS
(µg/dL)

EARLY FOLLOW-­UP
TESTING (2-­4 TESTS
AFTER INITIAL TEST
ABOVE SPECIFIC
VENOUS BLLs)

LATER FOLLOW-­
UP TESTING
AFTER BLL
DECLINING

≥3.5-­9

3 mo*

6-­9 mo

10-­19

1-­3 mo*

3-­6 mo

20-­44

2 wk to 1 mo

1-­3 mo

≥45

As soon as possible

As soon as
possible

BLL, Blood lead level.
Courtesy Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2022. https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/l
ead/advisory/acclpp/actions-­blls.htm

*The higher the blood lead level is on the initial screening capillary test, the more
urgent it is to get a venous sample for confirmatory testing.
Courtesy Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2022. https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/l
ead/advisory/acclpp/actions-­blls.htm#anchor_86654

confirms that the BLL is elevated, then further testing is required by the
recommended schedule (Table 761.5). A confirmed venous BLL of 45
μg/dL or higher requires prompt chelation therapy.

Other Tools for Assessment

BLL determinations remain the gold standard for evaluating children
because of ready availability and its correlation with health outcomes
in populations. Techniques are available to measure lead in other tissues and body fluids. Experimentally, the method of x-­ray fluorescence
(XRF) allows direct and noninvasive assessment of bone lead stores.
XRF methodology was used to evaluate a population that had long-­
term exposure to lead from a polluting battery-­recycling factory. The
study found that the school-­age children had elevated lead levels in
bone but not in venous blood, a finding that is consistent with our
understanding of the slow turnover of lead in bone, which is measurable in years, in contrast to that in blood, which is measurable in weeks.
It also indicates that children may have substantial lead in their bodies
that is not detected by routine blood lead testing. This stored lead may
be released to toxic levels if bone resorption rates suddenly increase,
as occurs with prolonged immobilization of longer than a week and
during pregnancy. Thus children with histories of elevated BLLs are
potentially at risk for recrudescence of lead toxicity long after ingestion
has stopped and may pass this lead to the next generation. XRF methodology is not available for clinical use in children.
Lead also can be measured in urine. Spontaneous excretion, even in
children with high BLLs, is usually low. Lead excretion may be stimulated by treatment with chelating agents, and this property of these
drugs forms the basis of their use as a component of lead treatment.
It also has been used to develop a test that differentiates children with
lead burdens responsive to chelation therapy, the lead mobilization
test. In this test, a timed urine collection follows one or two doses of
chelating agent, and the lead content is determined. However, this test
is no longer recommended.
Lead in hair, nails, and saliva also is measurable but has problems of
contamination and interpretability; thus these have no clinical utility.
Radiographs of long bones may show dense bands at the metaphyses
(“lead lines”), which may be difficult to distinguish from growth arrest

Fig. 761.1 Anteroposterior radiograph of the abdomen demonstrates
retention of radiopaque lead-­based paint chips within bowel, predominantly clustered in the ascending colon. Other etiologies resembling
“paint chips” include certain medications, eggshells, other heavy metals including iron-­and calcium-­containing supplements. Dense “lead
lines” are noted in the proximal femoral metaphyses. (From Swenson
DW, Walters MM. Musculoskeletal imaging. In: Walters MM, Robertson
RL, eds. Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017: Fig. 7.50, p. 214.)

lines but, if caused by lead, are indicative of months to years of exposure (Fig. 761.1). For children with acute symptoms, when a BLL result
is not immediately available, a kidneys-­ureters-­bladder (KUB) radiograph may reveal radiopaque flecks in the intestinal tract, a finding
that is consistent with recent ingestion of lead-­containing plaster or
paint chips (see Fig. 761.1). However, the absence of radiographic findings does not rule out lead poisoning.
Because BLLs reflect recent ingestion or redistribution from other tissues but do not necessarily correlate with the body burden of lead or lead
toxicity in an individual child, tests of lead effects also may be useful.
After several weeks of lead accumulation and a BLL higher than 20 μg/
dL, increases in EP values to more than 35 μg/dL may occur. An elevated
EP value that cannot be attributed to iron deficiency or recent inflammatory illness is both an indicator of lead effect and a useful means of
assessing the success of the treatment; the EP level will begin to fall a
few weeks after successful interventions that reduce lead ingestion and
increase lead excretion. Because EP is light sensitive, whole blood samples should be covered in aluminum foil (or equivalent) until analyzed.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4440 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
TREATMENT

All BLLs ≥3 μg/dL should be reported to state or local health departments. Once lead is in bone, it is released slowly and is difficult to
remove even with chelating agents. Because the cognitive/behavioral
effects of lead may be irreversible, the main effort in treating lead poisoning is to prevent it from occurring and to prevent further ingestion by already-­poisoned children. The main components in the effort
to eliminate lead poisoning are universally applicable to all children
(and adults) and are as follows: (1) identification and elimination of
environmental sources of lead exposure, (2) behavioral modification to
reduce nonnutritive hand-­to-­mouth activity, and (3) dietary counseling to ensure sufficient intake of the essential elements calcium and
iron and their supporting vitamins, D and C. For the small minority of
children with more severe lead poisoning, drug treatment is available
that enhances lead excretion. How effective these interventions may be
at reducing BLLs or improving cognitive function remains unclear at
the lower BLLs commonly observed currently in young children in the
United States.
During health maintenance visits a limited risk assessment is warranted, which includes questions pertaining to the most common
sources of lead exposure: the condition of old paint, secondary occupational exposure via an adult living in the home, and/or proximity
to an industrial source of pollution. If such a source is identified, its
elimination usually requires the assistance of public health and housing agencies as well as education for the parents. It would be safest for
the family to move out of a lead-­contaminated apartment until repairs
are completed. During repairs, repeated washes of surfaces and the
use of high-­efficiency particle accumulator (HEPA) vacuum cleaners
help reduce exposure to lead-­containing dust. Careful selection of a
contractor who is certified to perform lead abatement work is necessary. Sloppy work can cause dissemination of lead-­containing dust and
chips throughout a home or building and result in further elevation of
a child’s BLL. After the work is completed, dust wipe samples should
be collected from floors and windowsills or wells to verify that the risk
from lead has abated. The standards for what are considered acceptable
lead dust levels have recently been modified by the EPA to lower limits
that are more protective.
A single case of lead poisoning is often discovered in a household
with multiple family members, including other young children, and
even in a household with a common source of exposure such as peeling
lead-­based paint. The mere presence of lead in an environment does
not produce lead poisoning. Parental efforts at reducing the hand-­to-­
mouth activity of the affected child are necessary to reduce the risk of
lead ingestion. Handwashing with soap and water effectively removes
lead, but in a home with lead-­containing dust, lead rapidly begins to
reaccumulate on the child’s hands after washing. Therefore handwashing is best limited to the period immediately before nutritive hand-­to-­
mouth activity occurs.
Because there is competition between lead and essential metals, it is
reasonable to promote a healthy diet that is sufficient in calcium and
iron. The recommended daily intakes of these metals vary somewhat
with age. In general, for children 1 year of age and up, a calcium intake
of about 1 g/day is sufficient and convenient to remember (roughly the
calcium content of a quart of milk [∼1,200 mg/qt] or calcium-­fortified
orange juice). Calcium absorption is vitamin D dependent; milk is fortified with vitamin D, but other nutritional sources of calcium often are
not. A multivitamin containing vitamin D may be prescribed for children who do not drink sufficient milk or who have inadequate sunlight
exposure. Iron requirements also vary with age, ranging from 6 mg/
day for infants to 12 mg/day for adolescents. For children identified
biochemically as being iron deficient, therapeutic iron at a daily dose of
up to 5-­6 mg/kg/day for 3 months is appropriate. Iron absorption from
vegetables is enhanced when iron is ingested with vitamin C (ascorbic
acid), which is found in citrus juices. Giving additional calcium or iron
above the recommended daily intake to mineral-­sufficient children has
not been shown to be of therapeutic benefit in the treatment of lead
poisoning.

For children with BLLs of ≥20 μg/dL, an abdominal x-­ray should be
considered to check for lead-­based paint chips or leaded foreign bodies, if not already obtained. If radiopaque fragments are visualized on
imaging, bowel decontamination (typically with whole bowel irrigation) should be initiated (see Chapter 94).
Drug treatment to remove lead is lifesaving for children with lead
encephalopathy. In nonencephalopathic children, it prevents symptom progression and further toxicity. Guidelines for chelation are
based on the BLL. A child with a venous BLL of 45 μg/dL or higher
should be treated. Four drugs have been used in the United States:
2,3-­dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA [succimer]), CaNa2EDTA (versenate), British anti-lewisite (BAL [dimercaprol]), and penicillamine.
DMSA and penicillamine can be given orally, whereas CaNa2EDTA
and BAL can be administered only parenterally. The choice of agent
is guided by the severity of the lead poisoning, the effectiveness of the
drug, and the ease of administration (Table 761.6). Children with BLLs
of 44-­70 μg/dL may be treated with a single drug, preferably DMSA.
Those with BLLs of 70 μg/dL or greater require two-­drug treatment:
CaNa2EDTA in combination with either DMSA or BAL for those without evidence of encephalopathy, or CaNa2EDTA and BAL for those
with encephalopathy. Published data on the combined treatment with
CaNa2EDTA and DMSA for children with BLLs higher than 100 μg/
dL are very limited. However, anecdotal information derived from the
treatment of hundreds of severely lead-­poisoned children in northern
Nigeria indicates that single-­drug treatment with DMSA is lifesaving,
although the degree of long-­term residual damage in survivors has not
been reported.
Drug-­related toxicities are minor and reversible. These include gastrointestinal distress, transient elevations in transaminases, active urinary
sediment, and neutropenia. These types of events are least common for
CaNa2EDTA and DMSA, and more common for BAL and penicillamine. All of the drugs are effective in reducing BLLs when given in sufficient doses and for the prescribed time. These drugs also may increase
lead absorption from the gut and should be administered to children in
lead-­free environments. Some authorities also recommend the administration of a cathartic immediately before or concomitant with the initiation of chelation to eliminate any lead already in the gut.
None of these agents removes all lead from the body. Within days
to weeks after completion of a course of therapy, the BLL rises, even
in the absence of new lead ingestion. The source of this rebound in the
BLL is believed to be release from bone. Serial examinations of bone
lead content have shown that chelation with CaNa2EDTA is associated
with a decline in bone lead levels, but that residual bone lead remains
detectable even after multiple courses of treatment.
Repeat chelation is indicated if the BLL rebounds to 45 μg/dL or higher.
Children with initial BLLs higher than 70 μg/dL are likely to require
more than one course. A minimum of 3 days between courses is recommended to prevent treatment-­related toxicities, especially in the
kidney.
The indication for chelation therapy for children with BLLs <45 μg/dL
is less clear. Although use of these drugs in children with BLLs from 20-­
45 μg/dL will result in transiently lowered BLLs, and in some cases reversal of lead-­induced enzyme inhibition, few such children increase their
excretion of lead significantly during chelation, raising the question of
whether any long-­term benefit is achieved. A study of 2-­year-­old children
with BLLs of 20-­44 μg/dL who were randomized to receive either DMSA
or placebo found that the drop in BLLs was greater in the first 6 months
after enrollment in the DMSA-­treated group, but the levels converged by
1 year of follow-­up. Mean cognitive test scores obtained at 4 and 7 years
of age were not statistically different between the groups. Chelation with
DMSA (and CaNa2EDTA) is not recommended for all children with
BLLs <45 μg/dL. Further work needs to be done to determine whether
there are subgroups of children with BLLs <45 μg/dL who might benefit
from chelation. It also remains to be demonstrated whether other chelating agents available in the United States or elsewhere are effective at
either substantially reducing body stores (bone) of lead or reversing the
cognitive deficits attributable to lead at these BLLs.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 762 u Nonbacterial Food Poisoning

4441

Table 761.6  Chelators Used for Lead Poisoning
DOSAGE

INDICATIONS

CONTRAINDICATIONS

ADVERSE EFFECTS

Succimer
(DMSA)

1050 mg/m2/day divided into 3 doses for 5
days, then 700 mg/m2/day divided into 2
doses for 14 days (maximum 500 mg per
dose for children)

BLL >45 g/dL

None

Nausea, vomiting
Diarrhea
Metallic taste
Transient increase in AST/ALT

CaNa2EDTA

1,500 mg/mm2/day continuous intravenous
(IV) infusion for encephalopathy
Otherwise:
1,000 mg/m2/day divided in 2 to 4 doses
for up to 5 days, IV or IM

BLL >70 g/dL
(starting after first
dose of BAL or
succimer)
May substitute
for succimer if
that drug is not
tolerated

Severe renal disease
Hepatitis

Nephrotoxicity
Transient increase in AST/ALT
Arrythmia (bradycardia)

Dimercaprol
(BAL)

4 mg/kg deep IM injection every 4 hours for
5 days in children and adults

BLL >70 g/dL and
encephalopathy
Consider succimer as
alternative

Peanut allergy
Organic mercury
poisoning
Hepatic insufficiency

Pain at injection site
Hypertension and
tachycardia
Nausea, vomiting
Headache
Fever (especially in children)
Nephrotoxicity in the setting
of an acidic urine

d-­Penicillamine

1-1.5 g/day (children: 20-30 mg/kg/day), in 3
or 4 divided doses for 1-6 months
To minimize adverse reactions, start at 250
mg/day (children: 10 mg/kg/day) and
increase to 50% during week 2 and to a
full dose by week 3
Maximum adult daily dose is 2 g

BLL of 45 to 69 g/dL
AND succimer not
tolerated

Penicillin allergy

Leukopenia
Thrombocytopenia
Enuresis
Abdominal pain
Rashes

µ

µ

µ

µ

CHELATOR

Note: Indications for chelation and dosing regimens may change. Consult with a medical toxicologist or regional poison center for the most up-to-date recommendations.
BAL, British antilewisite; BLL, blood lead level; CaNa2EDTA, calcium disodium ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid; DMSA, 2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid; IM, intramuscular; AST, alanine
transaminase; ALT, aspartate transaminase.
Modified from Theobald JL, Mycyk MB. Iron and heavy metals. In: Walls RM, ed. Rosen’s Emergency Medicine, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table 146.5.

With successful intervention, BLLs decline, with the greatest fall
in BLL occurring in the first 2 months after therapy is initiated. Subsequently, the rate of change in BLL declines slowly, so that by 6-­12
months after identification, the BLL of the average child with moderate lead poisoning (BLL >20 μg/dL) will be 50% lower. Children with
more markedly elevated BLLs may take years to reach the current CDC
reference level, 3.5 μg/dL, even if all sources of lead exposure have been
eliminated, behavior has been modified, and nutrition has been maximized. Early screening remains the best way of avoiding and therefore
obviating the need for the treatment of lead poisoning.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 762

Nonbacterial Food
Poisoning
762.1 Mushroom Poisoning
Diane P. Calello and Katherine Baranowski
Mushrooms are an ideal food. They are low in calories, fat free, and
high in protein, making them a great source of nutrition. Unfortunately, some are highly toxic if ingested. Picking (foraging) and consumption of wild mushrooms are increasingly popular in the United

States. This rise in popularity has led to increased reports of severe and
fatal mushroom poisonings.
The clinical syndromes produced by mushroom poisoning are
divided according to the rapidity of onset of symptoms and the predominant system involved (Table 762.1). The symptoms are caused
by the principal toxin present in the ingested mushrooms. The eight
major toxins produced by mushrooms are categorized as cyclopeptide (amatoxin and phallotoxin), gyromitrin, muscarine, coprine, ibotenic acid and muscimol, psilocybin, orellanine, and gastrointestinal
tract–specific irritants. The edible wild mushroom Tricholoma equestre
is associated with delayed rhabdomyolysis, and Clitocybe amoenolens
and Clitocybe acromelalga have been reported to cause erythromelalgia, although toxins responsible for these effects are unknown.
Symptoms after eating mushrooms may not be the direct effect of
a toxin but may be an allergic reaction or a toxic effect of pesticides
or other contaminants. In addition, all who ate the same mushroom
may not become sick, or if they do, they may become sick at different
intervals. Table 762.2 lists general principles of management. Wherever
possible, identification of the implicated mushroom is encouraged via
mycologist or regional Poison Control Center.

GASTROINTESTINAL
Rapid Onset

Many mushrooms from various genera (such as Chlorophyllum species) produce local gastrointestinal manifestations. The causative
toxins are diverse and largely unknown. Within 1 hour of ingestion,
patients experience acute abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Symptoms may last hours to days, depending on the species of
mushroom.
Treatment is mainly supportive. Children with large fluid losses
may require parenteral fluid therapy. It is imperative to differentiate
ingestion of mushrooms of this class from ingestion of Amanita and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4442 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
Table 762.1  Summary of Common Mushroom-­Associated Syndromes
TYPICAL CAUSATIVE
MUSHROOM(S)

TOXIN

SYNDROME

CLINICAL COURSE

Cyclopeptides,
principally amatoxins

Delayed gastroenteritis
followed by hepatic failure

Stage 1: 6-­24 hr after ingestion: onset of
nausea, vomiting, profuse cholera-­like
diarrhea, abdominal pain, hematuria
Stage 2: 12-­48 hr after ingestion: apparent
recovery; levels of hepatic enzymes are
rising during this stage
Stage 3: 24-­72 hr after ingestion: progressive
hepatic and renal failure, coagulopathy,
cardiomyopathy, encephalopathy,
convulsions, coma, death

“Deadly Amanitas,” (A. phalloides,
A. bisporigera)
Galerina species

General gastrointestinal
irritants

Early gastroenteritis, may be
severe

30 min to 2 hr after ingestion: nausea,
vomiting, abdominal cramping, diarrhea;
may recover without treatment

Chlorophyllum molybdites,
backyard mushrooms (“little brown
mushrooms”), many others

Gyromitrin

Delayed gastroenteritis with
central nervous system
toxicity, seizures

6-­24 hr after ingestion: nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, abdominal pain, muscle cramps,
delirium, convulsions, coma; hemolysis, and
methemoglobinemia may occur

Gyromitra esculenta (“false morel”)

Orellanine

Delayed onset gastroenteritis
and renal failure

Abdominal pain, anorexia, vomiting starting
over 30 hr after ingestion, followed by
progressive renal failure 3-­14 days later

Cortinarius species

Muscarine

Cholinergic syndrome

30 min to 2 hr after ingestion: bradycardia,
bronchorrhea, bronchospasm, salivation,
perspiration, lacrimation, convulsions, coma

Clitocybe species, Inocybe species,
Boletus species, some Amanita
species

Coprine

Disulfiram-­like reaction with
ethanol

30 min after drinking ethanol (may occur up
to 1 week after eating coprine-­containing
mushrooms): flushing of skin of face and
trunk, hypotension, tachycardia, chest
pain, dyspnea, nausea, vomiting, extreme
apprehension

Coprinus atramentarius

Ibotenic acid and
muscimol

Hyperactivity, delirium, coma

30 min to 2 hours after ingestion: delirium,
hallucinations, and coma

Amanita muscaria, Amanita
pantherina

Psilocybin

Hallucinations

30 min to 3 hr after ingestion: hallucinations,
euphoria, drowsiness, compulsive behavior,
agitation

Psilocybe species

Modified from Brent J, Palmer RB: Mushrooms. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds. Haddad and Winchester’s Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose, 4th
ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2007: Table 23-­1.

Table 762.2  General Management of Mushroom
Ingestion

Galerina species containing cyclopeptide toxins, which present with
symptoms after 6 hours of ingestion.

1.	Determine history of ingestion: how many types of mushrooms
ingested, what time, if anyone else ate them, and what symptoms
are present.
2.	Attempt to determine which of the possible syndromes (see
Table 762.1) the patient may have. For example, gastrointestinal
symptoms occurring more than 6 hr after ingestion strongly
suggest cyclopeptide, gyromitrin, or Cortinarius poisoning.
3.	Administer activated charcoal. If the patient has diarrhea, do
not give a cathartic. If a cathartic is used, give it only with the
first dose of activated charcoal. Use repeated doses of activated
charcoal for suspected amatoxin poisonings.
4.	If feasible and when indicated, send gastric aspirate or emesis,
along with any remaining mushrooms, to a mycologist for
identification.
5.	Try to perform a preliminary identification of mushroom and
spores. Start to develop a spore print as soon as possible.
6.	Maintain supportive measures, including airway support,
intravenous fluids, and vasopressors (if needed). Monitor volume
status.
7.	Avoid antispasmodics for gastrointestinal symptoms.
8.	Anticipate the clinical course.

Delayed Onset
Cyclopeptide (Amatoxin) Poisoning

From Brent J, Palmer RB: Mushrooms. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.
Haddad and Winchester’s Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose, 4th
ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2007: Box 23.1.

Poisonings by species of Amanita (death cap mushroom) and Galerina account for 95% of the fatalities from mushroom intoxication;
the mortality rate for this group is 5–10%. Most species produce two
classes of cyclopeptide toxins: (1) phallotoxins, which are heptapeptides believed to be responsible for the early symptoms of Amanita
poisoning, and (2) amatoxins, octapeptides that inhibit nuclear RNA
polymerase II and subsequent production of messenger RNA leading
to impaired protein synthesis and cell death. Cells with high turnover
rates, such as those in the gastrointestinal mucosa, kidneys, and liver,
are the most severely affected. Other suggested toxin effects are induction of apoptosis, glutathione depletion in the liver, and oxygen free
radical formation. Acute yellow atrophy of the liver and necrosis of the
proximal renal tubules are found in lethal cases.
The clinical course of poisoning with Amanita or Galerina species is biphasic. Nausea, vomiting, and severe abdominal pain
ensue 6-­24 hours after ingestion. Profuse watery diarrhea follows
shortly thereafter and may last for 12-­24 hours or longer. During
this time, patients become severely dehydrated. From 24 to 48 hours

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 762 u Nonbacterial Food Poisoning
after poisoning, jaundice, hypertransaminasemia (peaking at 72-­96
hours), renal failure, and coma occur. Death occurs 4-­7 days after
the ingestion. A prothrombin time less than 10% of control is a poor
prognostic factor. Of note, there are species of Amanita mushrooms
that may present with earlier onset of symptoms and confound
diagnosis, such as Amanita smithiana, which grows in the Pacific
Northwest.

Treatment

Treatment for Amanita poisoning is both supportive and specific. Fluid
loss from severe diarrhea during the early course of the illness is profound, requiring aggressive correction of fluid loss, electrolytes, and
acid-­base disturbances. In the late phase of the disease, management of
renal and hepatic failure is also necessary.
Specific therapy for Amanita poisoning is designed to remove the
toxin rapidly and to block binding at its target site. Oral activated
charcoal is recommended as part of the initial treatment for children with Amanita poisoning. For significant ingestions, intravenous silibinin or intravenous penicillin G may be considered after
discussion with a toxicologist or Poison Control Center. Silibinin
and penicillin G inhibit binding of both toxins, interrupt enterohepatic recirculation of amatoxin, and protect the liver from further
injury, although their effectiveness is controversial. N-­acetylcysteine
should be given for hepatoprotective effect. Hemodialysis or hemoperfusion may be beneficial in removing toxin. Orthotopic liver
transplantation may be required for children with severe hepatic
failure.

Gyromitrin Poisoning

Species of Gyromitra contain gyromitrin, which decomposes in
the stomach to form monomethylhydrazine (CH3NHNH2) and
inhibits central nervous system (CNS) enzymatic production of γ-­
aminobutyric acid (GABA). Monomethylhydrazine also oxidizes
iron in hemoglobin, resulting in methemoglobinemia. Children
with Gyromitra poisoning often experience vomiting, diarrhea, and
abdominal pain within 6-­24 hours of ingestion of the toxin. CNS
symptoms such as vertigo, diplopia, headache, ataxia, and seizures
develop later in the clinical course. Hemolysis and methemoglobinemia (see Chapter 511.6) are rare but potential life-­threatening complications of gyromitrin poisoning.

Treatment

Hypovolemia from gastrointestinal fluid losses and seizures require
supportive intervention. Pyridoxal phosphate, the coenzyme that catalyzes the production of GABA, can reverse the effects of monomethylhydrazine when administered in high doses. Pyridoxine hydrochloride
(25 mg/kg infused over 30 minutes) is given at a frequency that is
dependent on clinical improvement. Diazepam is given for persistent
seizures. Parenteral administration of methylene blue is indicated if the
methemoglobin concentration exceeds 30%. Blood transfusions may
be required for significant hemolysis.

RENAL
Orellanine Poisoning

Species of Cortinarius mushrooms contain the heat-­stable toxin bipyridyl orellanine, which causes severe nonglomerular renal injury characterized by interstitial fibrosis and acute tubular necrosis. Although the
exact mechanism of injury is not fully understood, a metabolite of orellanine is thought to inhibit renal protein synthesis. Cortinarius poisoning
is characterized by delayed onset of nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea that
manifest 36-­48 hours after ingestion. Although the initial symptoms may
be trivial, more serious renal toxicity occurs in several days. Acute renal
failure occurs in 30–50% of those affected, beginning with polyuria and
progressing to renal failure (see Chapter 572).

Treatment

Treatment for orellanine poisoning is supportive. Early presentation,
within 4-­6 hours after ingestion, can be treated with activated charcoal
and gastric lavage. Hemodialysis may be needed in patients suffering
from renal failure. Most patients recover within 1 month, but chronic

4443

renal insufficiency develops in one third to one half of patients who
subsequently require renal transplantation.

AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
Muscarine Poisoning

Mushrooms of the genera Inocybe and, to a lesser degree, Clitocybe
contain muscarine or muscarine-­related compounds. These quaternary ammonium derivatives bind to postsynaptic receptors, producing
an exaggerated cholinergic response.
The onset of symptoms is rapid (30 minutes to 2 hours after consumption), and intoxication is characterized by symptoms of cholinergic excess: diaphoresis, excessive lacrimation, salivation, miosis,
bradycardia, hypotension, urinary and fecal incontinence, and vomiting. Respiratory distress caused by bronchospasm and increased
bronchopulmonary secretions is the most serious complication. The
symptoms subside spontaneously within 6-­24 hours.

Treatment

Atropine sulfate, the specific antidote, is administered intravenously
(0.01 mg/kg; maximum: 2 mg). This is repeated until the pulmonary
symptoms resolve or the patient becomes overtly tachycardic.

Coprine Poisoning

Coprinus atramentarius and Clitocybe clavipes contain coprine. Like
disulfiram (Antabuse; Odyssey Pharmaceuticals, Inc.), coprine inhibits the metabolism of acetaldehyde after ethanol ingestion. The clinical
manifestations result from accumulation of acetaldehyde.
Coprine intoxication becomes apparent after ethanol ingestion and
may be delayed up to 5 days after consumption of the mushroom.
Hyperemia of the face and trunk, tingling of the hands, metallic taste,
tachycardia, and vomiting occur acutely. Hypotension may result from
intense peripheral vasodilation.
The syndrome typically is self-­limited and lasts only several hours.
No specific antidote is available. If hypotension is severe, vascular reexpansion with isotonic parenteral solutions may be required.

CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Ibotenic acid and Muscimol Poisoning

Although Amanita muscaria and Amanita pantherina may contain
muscarine, the toxins responsible for the CNS symptoms after ingestion of these mushrooms are primarily muscimol and ibotenic acid,
the heat-­stable derivatives of the isoxazoles. Muscimol, a hallucinogen,
and ibotenic acid, an insecticide, act as GABA agonists. From 30 minutes to 3 hours after ingestion, CNS symptoms appear: obtundation,
alternating lethargy and agitation, and occasionally seizures. Nausea and vomiting are uncommon. If large amounts of muscarine are
contained in the mushroom, symptoms of cholinergic crisis also may
occur.
Specific therapy must be carefully selected, and in most cases supportive care will suffice. If an exaggerated cholinergic response is
observed, atropine should be administered. Conversely, because ingestions of A. muscaria or A. pantherina may cause anticholinergic findings, the acetylcholinesterase inhibitor physostigmine can be used
to reverse the delirium and coma. Benzodiazepines also are used for
the agitation and delirium. Seizures can be controlled with diazepam.
In the majority of patients, however, early supportive care and close
observation are all that is required.

Psilocybin Intoxication

Mushrooms belonging to the genus Psilocybe (“magic mushrooms”)
contain psilocybin and psilocin, two psychotropic compounds.
Within 30 minutes after ingestion, patients experience euphoria and
hallucinations, often accompanied by tachycardia and mydriasis. Fever
and seizures have also been observed in children with psilocybin poisoning. These symptoms are short-­lived, usually lasting for 6 hours
after consumption of the mushroom. Treatment consists of rest and
observation in a quiet environment. Severely agitated patients may
respond to diazepam.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4444 Part XXXII u Environmental Health

762.2 Solanine Poisoning
Katherine Baranowski and Diane P. Calello
Solanine is an alkaloid found in plants of the nightshade family (Solanaceae), specifically tomatoes, eggplant, paprika and pepper-­based spices,
and most significantly, white potatoes. The majority of solanine poisoning reported has arisen from the ingestion of greened potatoes. When
exposed to light and allowed to turn green and/or sprout, potatoes produce several alkaloid glycosides containing the cholesterol derivative
solanidine. Two of these glycosides, α-­solanine and α-­chaconine, are
found in highest concentration in the peels and sprouts. Some solanine
can be removed by boiling but not by baking. The major effect of α-­
solanine and α-­chaconine is the reversible inhibition of cholinesterase.
Cardiotoxic and teratogenic effects have also been reported.
Clinical manifestations of solanine and chaconine poisoning occur
within 7-­19 hours after ingestion. The most common symptoms are
vomiting, abdominal pain, and diarrhea; in more severe instances of
poisoning, neurologic symptoms, including drowsiness, apathy, confusion, weakness, and vision disturbances, are rarely followed by coma
or death.
Treatment of solanine poisoning is largely supportive. In the most
severe cases, symptoms resolve within 1-­2 weeks.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for a Bibliography.

762.3 Seafood Poisoning
Diane P. Calello and Katherine Baranowski

CIGUATERA FISH POISONING

The most frequently reported seafood toxin illness in the world is
ciguatera fish poisoning. Grouper is the most commonly identified
source of the toxin, followed by snapper, kingfish, amberjack, dolphin,
eel, and barracuda. Poisoning has also been associated with farm-­
raised salmon.
The dinoflagellate Gambierdiscus toxicus, a microscopic unicellular organism found along coral reefs, produces high concentrations of
ciguatoxin and maitotoxin. The toxins are passed along the food chain
from small herbivorous fish that consume the dinoflagellate to larger
predatory fish and then to humans. These toxins are harmless in fish
but produce distinct clinical symptoms in humans.
Ciguatoxins are odorless, colorless, and tasteless and are not
destroyed by cooking or freezing. Ciguatoxins increase the sodium
ion permeability of excitable membranes and depolarize nerve cells,
actions that are inhibited by calcium and tetrodotoxin.
Between 2 and 30 hours after ingestion, ciguatera fish poisoning
typically produces a biphasic illness. The initial symptoms are nonspecific and are of gastrointestinal origin (diarrhea, vomiting, nausea,
and abdominal pain). The second phase occurs within a few days of
ingestion and consists of intense itching, anxiety, myalgias, painful
intercourse, feeling of loose teeth, and rash on palms and soles; the
neurologic symptoms of circumoral dysesthesias and cold allodynia
(reversal of hot and cold sensation) are characteristic of this disease and
may last for months. Tachycardia, bradycardia, hypotension, and death
occur very infrequently. Eating fish organs, roe, or viscera is associated
with greater symptom severity. The diagnosis of ciguatera fish poisoning is based on clinical presentation and a compatible epidemiologic
history; the diagnosis is confirmed by testing the ingested fish for toxin.
There is no human biomarker to confirm ciguatera fish poisoning.

Treatment

Treatment of ciguatera fish poisoning is supportive. Intravenous fluids may be required for severe diarrhea, and careful observation for
hypovolemic shock is advised. Once adequate hydration is established,
mannitol (0.5-­1.0 g/kg intravenously over 30-­45 minutes), given within
48-­72 hours of the toxic fish ingestion, is recommended for reduction

of acute symptoms (especially neurologic symptoms) and possible prevention of chronic neurologic symptoms. Various other medications
and herbal remedies have been tried, with variable results. Most cases
are self-­limited with a favorable prognosis.

SCOMBROID (PSEUDOALLERGIC) FISH POISONING

Ingestion of members of the Scombridae families, including albacore,
mackerel, tuna, bonito, and kingfish, have been linked to major outbreaks of pseudoallergic fish poisoning. Non-­scombroid fish such as
mahi-­mahi (dolphin fish), swordfish, and bluefish also are associated
with poisoning.
The bacterial transformation of histidine to histamine is responsible
for the clinical syndrome. Histidine is found in high concentrations
in the flesh of scombroid fish; if refrigeration is inadequate, the action
of bacterial decarboxylases during putrefaction converts histidine to
histamine. Fish containing more than 20 mg of histamine per 100 g
of flesh are toxic. In patients receiving isoniazid, a potent histaminase
blocker, ingestion of fish flesh containing a lower concentration of histamine may be toxic.
The onset of clinical manifestations is acute and occurs within 10
minutes to 2 hours of ingestion. The most common symptoms and
signs are diarrhea, erythema, sweating, flushing, diaphoresis, urticaria,
nausea, and headache (Fig. 762.1). Abdominal pain, tachycardia, oral
burning or numbness, dizziness, respiratory distress, hives, and facial
swelling also occur. The illness is usually self-­limited, terminating
within 8-­24 hours.

Treatment

Treatment is mainly supportive. With severe diarrhea, fluid replacement may be necessary. Antihistamines and antiemetics have been
variably successful.

PARALYTIC SHELLFISH POISONING

Mussels, clams, oysters, scallops, and other filter-­feeding mollusks may
become contaminated during dinoflagellate blooms or “red tides.”
During periods of contamination, water in coastal areas can be colored red by the algae; this sign is the origin of the term red tide. (Such
discoloration does not necessarily indicate the presence of toxin, and
toxin may be present in high quantities without discoloration. Nonetheless, discolored water should be regarded with suspicion.) The dinoflagellates Alexandrium spp. and Gymnodinium catenatum often are
responsible for these red tides and contain several potent neurotoxins.
Paralytic shellfish poisoning is a distinctive neurologic illness caused
by 20 closely related heat-­stable paralytic shellfish toxins, generally
referred to as saxitoxins. These compounds prevent nerve conduction
by inhibiting the sodium-­potassium pump. Consumption of bivalves,
such as mussels, scallops, and clams, is the usual pathway of intoxication, although crustaceans and fish have been implicated as well.
The onset of clinical manifestations of paralytic shellfish poisoning
occurs rapidly, 30 minutes to 2 hours after ingestion. Abdominal pain
and nausea are common. Paresthesias are common and occur circumorally or in a stocking-­glove distribution, or both. Perioral numbness
or tingling, diplopia, ataxia, dysarthria, and the sensation of floating
are seen less commonly. In severe cases, respiratory failure from diaphragmatic paralysis may result. Swimming in the water during a red
tide episode does not appear to have neurologic sequelae, although
skin or mucosal irritation may result.

Treatment

No antidote for paralytic shellfish poisoning is known. Supportive care,
including mechanical ventilation, may be needed. Although the symptoms are usually self-­limited and short-­lived, weakness and malaise
may persist for weeks after ingestion.

NEUROTOXIC SHELLFISH POISONING

Neurotoxic shellfish poisoning is a rare disease that occurs after consumption of molluscan shellfish contaminated with brevetoxins. Shellfish harvested along the Gulf of Mexico during or right after a red
tide are at risk of contamination with brevetoxins produced by the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 762 u Nonbacterial Food Poisoning

A

B

4445

C

Fig. 762.1 Scombroid fish poisoning. A and B, Widespread erythematous rash predominantly on the face (not shown) and trunk of patient 1. C,

Close-­up view of the upper chest area. Note the absence of wheals. (Modified from Jantschitsch C, Kinaciyan T, Manafi M, et al. Severe scombroid
fish poisoning: an underrecognized dermatologic emergency. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2011;65[1]:246–247. Fig. 1.)

dinoflagellate Karenia brevis; some raphidophytes (Chattonella spp.)
also produce brevetoxins. Brevetoxins are a group of more than 10
lipid-­soluble neurotoxins that activate sodium ion channels, causing
nerve membrane depolarization. Shellfish are not affected by brevetoxins. Rinsing, cleaning, cooking, and freezing do not destroy the toxins,
which also cannot be detected by taste or smell.
The onset of clinical manifestations of neurotoxic shellfish poisoning occurs from within a few minutes up to 18 hours after consumption. Most symptoms are gastrointestinal (nausea, vomiting, and
diarrhea) or neurologic (numbness and tingling of the lips, mouth,
face, and extremities, ataxia, partial limb paralysis, reversal of hot
and cold sensation, slurred speech, headache, and fatigue). Neurotoxic shellfish poisoning is similar to a mild case of paralytic shellfish
poisoning.

Treatment

There are no specific antidotes for brevetoxins. Treatment involves
mostly supportive care. Brevenal, a natural antagonist of brevetoxin
produced by K. brevis, may be used as a form of treatment in the future.

DIARRHETIC SHELLFISH POISONING

Several outbreaks of diarrhetic shellfish poisoning have been reported
in Europe after consumption of mussels, cockles, and other shellfish.
The dinoflagellates Dinophysis and Prorocentrum produce okadaic acid
and its derivatives, the dinophysistoxins. These compounds inhibit
protein phosphatases. The intracellular accumulation of phosphorylated proteins causes increased fluid secretion by gut cells via calcium
influx, which is mediated by cyclic adenosine monophosphate and
prostaglandins.
Patients have severe diarrhea. Care is supportive and directed at
rehydration. The illness is self-­limited, and recovery occurs in 3-­4 days;
few patients require hospitalization.

AMNESIC SHELLFISH POISONING

Amnesic shellfish poisoning has been identified after consumption of
shellfish from the United States, Spain, and the United Kingdom. The
responsible toxin, domoic acid, comes from a diatom, Pseudonitzschia
multiseries, and is a potent glutamate agonist, disrupting neurochemical transmission in the brain. It also binds to glutamate receptors,
which increase calcium influx, producing neuronal swelling in the hippocampal area of the brain and death.

The initial clinical manifestations are gastrointestinal with nausea,
vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal cramps within 24 hours of ingestion. Neurologic symptoms may follow including headache, confusion, and short-­term memory loss. Memory loss is closely related to
advanced age with those >50 years more likely to suffer from memory
loss lasting months to years.

PUFFERFISH POISONING

The consumption of pufferfish (blowfish) in certain geographic areas
such as Japan and the Indo-­Pacific Ocean is associated with a lethal
neurotoxic illness due to tetrodotoxin. Fugu, a Japanese delicacy, is
sought after in part because of the subtle neurotoxic effects experienced upon eating, including perioral paresthesias and a dissociative
feeling. While a trained fugu chef will remove the most toxic parts of
the fish, the toxin is still found in varying degrees.
Tetrodotoxin, which is also found in the blue-­ringed octopus, causes
a paralytic illness due to the blockade of voltage-­dependent sodium
channels. Early symptoms include paresthesias, nausea, and dizziness,
which progresses to weakness, numbness, and incoordination. Autonomic compromise may also occur with bradycardia and hypotension.
In the most severe of cases, respiratory compromise requires assisted
ventilation.
There is no specific antidote for tetrodotoxin pufferfish poisoning.

AZASPIRACID POISONING

The azaspiracids are a class of algal toxins associated with harmful
algal blooms (HABs). Azaspiracid poisoning results from ingestion of
contaminated bivalve shellfish, especially mussels. Azaspiracid toxins
are distributed throughout the muscle tissue in the shellfish. Azaspiracid is cytotoxic to cells and an inhibitor of Ca2+ channels in plasma
membranes. Symptoms start 6-­18 hours after ingestion and include
nausea, vomiting, severe stomach cramps, and diarrhea, which often
persist up to 5 days.
Cyanobacteria (blue-­green algae) also produce HABs; exposure is
usually during recreational water sports and may be cutaneous or gastrointestinal. Symptoms include rash, cough, abdominal pain, diarrhea,
nausea, emesis, muscle aches, watery eyes, weakness, or sore throat.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4446 Part XXXII u Environmental Health

762.4 Melamine Poisoning
Katherine Baranowski and Diane P. Calello
Melamine (1,3,5-­triazine-­2,4,6-­triamine, or C3H6N6) is found in
many plastics, adhesives, laminated products, cement, cleansers, fire
retardant paint, and more. Melamine poisoning from food products
was unheard of until 2007, when melamine-­tainted pet food caused
the death of many dogs and cats in the United States. In 2008, feeding of melamine-­tainted infant formula to more than 300,000 children
resulted in urolithiasis and resultant kidney injuries, 50,000 hospitalizations, and 6 deaths in China. This was the first reported epidemic of
melamine-­tainted milk products.
Melamine contains 66% nitrogen by mass. The illegal addition of
melamine to infant formula can give the formula a milky appearance
and falsely raise the protein content as measured by nitrogen testing.
Melamine, combined with cyanuric acid, forms cyanurate crystals in
the kidneys. Along with protein, uric acid, and phosphate, melamine
forms renal calculi. The melamine stones and gravel can be treated with
hydration, alkalinization, or lithotripsy. Acute renal failure requires
supportive care and dialysis if needed.
Clinical manifestations are initially subtle and nonspecific. The
severity is dose related. The first symptoms in affected infants are unexplained crying (especially when urinating), vomiting, and discolored
urine caused by the formation of stones and gravel in the urinary tract.
Urinary obstruction and acute renal failure follow. In the absence of
a specific diagnosis, death from renal failure may occur. Whether
children with melamine-­induced renal failure will have chronic renal
sequelae is currently unknown.
In addition to the more well-­known renal toxicity, cognitive defects
can be seen after acute, chronic, or prenatal exposure. Dissolved and
insoluble melamine and its insoluble metabolites all have the potential
to cause neurotoxicity.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 763

Biological and Chemical
Terrorism
Theodore J. Cieslak, Jonathan Newmark,
and Mark G. Kortepeter*
In April of 2017, an attack on the town of Khan Shaykhun in Syria
employed a poisonous “nerve agent” (likely sarin) that resulted in the
deaths of at least 92 civilians, many of them young children. The attack
intentionally targeted civilian neighborhoods at the time children were
getting ready for school, which is strong evidence that its purpose was
terror, not warfare. Terrorist actions targeting children are not novel.
Brought to the forefront of American consciousness by Timothy

* The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
position of the University of Nebraska, the U.S. Department of Defense, Health and Human
Services, and Veterans’ Affairs, or their component entities.

McVeigh’s references to child fatalities as “collateral damage” during
the Oklahoma City bombing in April 1995, the intentional targeting of
children became a global reality with the attack upon a school in Beslan,
Russia, in September 2004. The attack, which left 334 dead (including
186 children), presaged additional attacks specifically directed against
children. School shootings have become an all too frequent occurrence
in the United States with over 175 children dying from mass shootings
on school grounds since 1999.
Paralleling the targeting of children is an apparent trend toward the
use of “unconventional” weapons of terror. In 1984, members of the
Rajneeshee cult employed Salmonella typhi in a wave of intentional
poisonings that affected 751 persons, including 142 teenage patrons
of a popular pizza parlor. In 1995, the Aum Shinrikyo cult killed 12
and sickened thousands by intentionally releasing sarin nerve agent in
the Tokyo subway system. A disgruntled scientist allegedly deployed
anthrax spores via the U.S. mail in October 2001, killing 5 and injuring
17 in an attack upon a nation already reeling in the wake of the 9/11
attacks. Conflicts in Afghanistan, Syria, and Iraq from 2012 to 2016 led
to another spike in chemical attacks.
These developments remind us that terrorists can strike at any time,
utilizing any number of unconventional weapons, including biologic
and chemical agents. Children will not be spared in these attacks on
civilians, and indeed schools and daycare sites may be the targets of
these actions.

ETIOLOGY

Although terrorists may choose to use weapons of opportunity,
agents that are readily available to some member of the terrorist
group, the motives of terrorists often are obscure and difficult to predict. Prevention and response strategies should thus concentrate not
on those agents most likely to be used but, rather, on those agents
that, if used, would constitute the gravest potential threats to public
health and security.
Biologic threat agents, including pathogens and toxins, have been
divided by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
into three categories, with category A including diseases caused
by those six agents posing the greatest threat: anthrax, plague (see
Chapter 249.3), tularemia (see Chapter 252), smallpox, botulism (see
Chapter 256), and the viral hemorrhagic fevers, including Ebola (see
Chapter 317).
Terrorists could also procure and release a vast array of potentially
harmful chemicals. The Chemical Threat Risk Assessment prepared
by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security lists over 170 chemical
compounds as potential threats in accidental or deliberate scenarios.
Tank cars full of flammable industrial gases and liquids, corrosive
industrial acids and bases, poisonous compounds such as cyanides and
nitrites, pesticides, dioxins, and explosives traverse our railways and
roads daily. Four classes of “military-­grade” chemicals with a history of
use in warfare or manufactured specifically for use as weapons include
the organophosphate-­based nerve agents, vesicants, cyanides (misleadingly referred to as “blood agents”), and certain pulmonary irritants or
“choking agents.”

EPIDEMIOLOGY AND PEDIATRIC-­SPECIFIC
CONCERNS

Large-­scale attacks on civilian targets will likely involve pediatric
victims. Children may be more susceptible than adults to the effects
of certain biologic and chemical agents (see Chapter 759). A thinner and less-­keratinized epidermis makes dermally active agents,
such as mustard or trichothecene mycotoxins, a greater risk to children than to adults. A larger surface area per unit volume further
increases the problem. A small relative blood volume makes children more susceptible to the volume losses associated with enteric
infections such as cholera and to gastrointestinal intoxications such
as might be seen with exposure to the staphylococcal enterotoxins. The high minute ventilation of children, compared with that
of adults, increases the threat of agents delivered via the inhalational route. The fact that children live “closer to the ground” compounds this effect when heavier-­than-­air chemicals are involved.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 763 u Biological and Chemical Terrorism
An immature blood-­brain barrier may heighten the risk of central
nervous system toxicity from nerve agents. Developmental considerations make it less likely that a child would readily flee an area
of danger, thereby increasing exposure to these various adverse
effects. Moreover, children are more likely to be terrified at the sight
of responders in personal protective ensembles.
Children appear to have a unique susceptibility to certain agents
that might be used by terrorists. Although adults generally suffer
only a brief, self-­limited incapacitating illness after infection with
Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus, young children are more
likely to experience seizures, permanent neurologic sequelae, and
death. In the case of smallpox, waning herd immunity may disproportionately affect children. Vaccine-­induced immunity to smallpox diminishes significantly after 3-­10 years. Although most adults
are considered susceptible to smallpox given that routine civilian
immunization ceased in the early 1970s, older adults may have
some residual protection from death, if not from the development
of disease. Today’s children are among the first to grow up in a
world without any individual or herd immunity to smallpox.
Children also may experience unique disease manifestations not
seen in adults. Suppurative parotitis is a common characteristic
finding among children with melioidosis but is not generally seen
in adults with Burkholderia pseudomallei infection (see Chapter
251.2). Seizures, often the presenting symptom of cyanide or nerve
agent poisoning, may be much more difficult to recognize clinically
in children than in adults, more likely presenting as unresponsiveness or change in mental status than tonic-­clonic episodes.
Pediatricians are likely to experience unique problems in managing childhood victims of a biologic or chemical attack. Many of the
drugs useful in treating such casualties are unfamiliar to pediatricians or have relative contraindications in childhood. The fluoroquinolones and tetracyclines are commonly cited as agents of choice
in the treatment and prophylaxis of anthrax, plague, tularemia, brucellosis, and Q fever. Both drug classes are often avoided in children,
although the risk of morbidity and mortality from diseases induced
by agents of bioterrorism far outweighs the minor risk associated
with short-­term use of these agents. Ciprofloxacin received, as its
first licensed pediatric indication, approval from the FDA for use in
the prophylaxis of anthrax after inhalational exposure during a terrorist attack; doxycycline and levofloxacin are licensed specifically
in children for the same indication. Levofloxacin is also licensed for
postexposure prophylaxis of children against plague, and moxifloxacin is considered an acceptable alternative to first-­line therapies
for the treatment of plague in those less than 18 years of age. Immunizations potentially useful in preventing biologic agent–induced
diseases are often not approved for use in pediatric patients. The
available anthrax vaccine is licensed only for those between 18
and 65 years. The plague vaccine, currently out of production and
probably ineffective against inhalational exposures, was approved
only for individuals ages 18-­61 years. The live replicating smallpox
vaccine (ACAM2000), a live vaccine employing vaccinia virus, can
cause fetal demise when given to pregnant women. A nonreplicating smallpox (and mpox) vaccine (Jynneos) was introduced in 2019.
Many otherwise useful pharmaceutical agents are not available
in pediatric dosing regimens. The military distributes nerve agent
antidote kits consisting of prefilled autoinjectors designed for the
rapid administration of atropine and pralidoxime. Many emergency
departments and some ambulances stock these kits. The doses of
agents contained in the nerve agent antidote kit are calculated for
soldiers and thus are inappropriate for young children, and pediatric pralidoxime autoinjectors are not yet available. Atropine autoinjectors specifically formulated for children are approved by the
FDA, although their availability is limited. Unfortunately, there
is no pediatric combination autoinjector containing atropine and
pralidoxime, the backbone of acute nerve agent treatment in adults.
Moreover, children smaller than 7 kg (15 pounds) are too small for
safe use of atropine autoinjectors, while obtaining venous access
may be time-­consuming and extremely difficult in a contaminated
environment.

4447

Although physical protective measures and devices (e.g., “gas
masks”) are likely to be of little utility in a civilian terrorism setting,
such commercially available devices are not often available in pediatric sizes. The Israeli experience during the first Gulf War suggests that
frightened parents may improperly use such masks on their children,
resulting in inadvertent suffocation.
In the event of a large-­scale terrorist attack, there may be an
insufficient number of pediatric hospital beds. In any large disaster,
excess bed capacity might potentially be provided at civilian and
veterans hospitals under the auspices of the National Disaster Medical System. Although that system now specifically tracks pediatric
beds, none of these would be found in the Veterans Administration
system and few are likely to exist elsewhere. The situation is even
more dire regarding burn unit beds, which may be needed in an
attack with vesicants such as sulfur mustard.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Should a terrorist attack occur, clinicians may be called on to make
prompt diagnoses and render rapid lifesaving treatments before the
results of confirmatory diagnostic tests are available. Although each
potential agent of terrorism produces its own unique clinical manifestations, it is useful for the frontline clinician to consider their
effects in terms of a limited number of distinct clinical syndromes.
This approach helps clinicians make prompt, rational decisions
regarding empirical therapy. Casualties resulting from a terrorist
attack would either experience symptoms immediately upon exposure to an agent (or within the first several hours after exposure) or
would see their symptoms develop slowly over a period of days to
weeks. In the former case, the sinister nature of the event is often
obvious and the etiology more likely to be conventional or chemical
in nature.
Biologic agents differ from conventional, chemical (see Chapter 759), and nuclear (see Chapter 758) weapons in that they have
inherent incubation periods. Consequently, patients are likely to
present distant in time and place from the point of an unannounced
and unnoticed exposure to a biologic agent. Whereas traditional
first responders, such as firefighters and paramedics, may be at the
forefront of a conventional or chemical terrorism response, the primary care physician or emergency room is likely to constitute the
first line of defense against the effects of a biologic agent.
Casualties can thus be categorized as either immediate or delayed
in presentation. Within each of these categories, patients can be
further classified as having primarily respiratory, neuromuscular,
or dermatologic manifestations (Table 763.1). A limited number of
agents may cause each particular syndrome, permitting institution
of empiric therapy targeted at a short list of potential etiologies.
The viral hemorrhagic fevers might manifest as fever and a bleeding diathesis; these agents are considered separately in Chapter
317. In most cases, supportive care is the mainstay of hemorrhagic
fever treatment, although two drugs (Inmazeb, Ebanga) have
recently been licensed for the treatment of adults and children with
Ebola.

Sudden-­Onset Neuromuscular Syndrome: Nerve
Agents

The very rapid onset of neuromuscular symptoms after an exposure
should lead the clinician to consider nerve agent intoxication. The
nerve agents (tabun, sarin, soman, and VX) are organophosphate
analogs of common pesticides that act as potent inhibitors of the
enzyme acetylcholinesterase. The so-­called “Novichok” agents, used
in deliberate attacks upon Russian targets in Salisbury, UK (2018)
and Tomsk, Russia (2020), also belong to this agent class. The nerve
agents are hazardous via ingestion, inhalation, or cutaneous absorption (see Chapter 94).
The inhibition of cholinesterase by these compounds results in
the accumulation of acetylcholine at neural and neuromuscular
junctions, causing excess stimulation. The resultant cholinergic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4448 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
Table 763.1  Diseases Caused by Agents of Chemical and Biologic Terrorism, Classified by Syndrome
NEUROMUSCULAR SYMPTOMS
PROMINENT

RESPIRATORY SYMPTOMS
PROMINENT

DERMATOLOGIC FINDINGS
PROMINENT

Sudden-­onset or intermediate-­
onset

Nerve agents

Chlorine
Phosgene
Cyanide

Mustard
Lewisite

Delayed-­onset

Botulism

Anthrax
Plague
Tularemia
Ricin

Smallpox

syndrome involves central, nicotinic, and muscarinic effects. Central effects are both muscarinically and nicotinically mediated and
include altered mental status progressing rapidly to lethargy and
coma, as well as ataxia, convulsions, and central respiratory depression. Studies on pesticide exposure suggest that children may be
more prone to central neurologic dysfunction with organophosphate toxicity than adults. The most lethal effects are respiratory,
which result not only from central effects but also from direct
paralysis of the diaphragm and other respiratory muscles (nicotinic effects), as well as bronchospasm and bronchorrhea (muscarinic effects). Nicotinic effects include muscle fasciculations and
twitching, followed by weakness, which can progress to flaccid
paralysis as muscles fatigue. Importantly, flaccid paralysis is not
present initially, as in a patient with botulinum toxin poisoning. In
botulinum toxin poisoning, neurotransmitter cannot be released
from the presynaptic terminal, whereas in nerve agent poisoning,
excess neurotransmitter accumulates because acetylcholinesterase,
the enzyme that turns off the transmitter, is inhibited. Muscarinic
effects include miosis (the clinical hallmark of a patient who has
suffered a non–life-­threatening nerve agent challenge), visual blurring, profuse lacrimation, and watery rhinorrhea. Bronchospasm
and increased bronchial secretions lead to cough, wheezing, dyspnea, and cyanosis. Cardiovascular manifestations include bradycardia, hypotension, and atrioventricular block. Flushing, sweating,
salivation, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal cramps, and urinary incontinence are also seen. In the absence of prompt intervention, death can quickly result from a combination of central effects
and respiratory muscle paralysis.
The classic neuromuscular syndrome of extremely acute symptoms most commonly results from an aerosol or vapor exposure,
the most likely route in a terrorist attack. But nerve agents are liquids at standard temperature and pressure and do not cause immediate irritation to skin. Liquid nerve agent may thus pass through
the skin and enter the systemic circulation, causing cholinergic crisis. This can be delayed by minutes to hours, depending upon dose
and body site. In children, because the stratum corneum of the skin
forms only gradually, skin transit time will be reduced. Miosis may
be a late development. If the clinician suspects that the child may
have been exposed to nerve agent via the cutaneous route, they should
immediately treat, even if miosis has not yet developed.
Cyanide poisoning is a major differential diagnosis of nerve
agent poisoning in an attack scenario. Cyanide poisons cytochrome
a3 in the mitochondrial electron transport chain and can cause
an almost immediate and rather similar syndrome of loss of consciousness, immediate rapid breathing, status epilepticus, and rapid
progression to cardiac arrest. Important clinical differential points
include miosis, which is usually absent in cyanide poisoning, and
the usual lack of cyanosis (ironically) due to the tissues’ inability to
use oxygen from the blood, causing venous blood to retain oxygen
and remain red. In an emergency, it may be necessary to treat for
both nerve agent and cyanide poisoning until the cause is definitively identified.

Delayed-­Onset Neuromuscular Syndrome: Botulism

The delayed onset (hours to days after exposure) of neuromuscular symptoms is characteristic of botulism. Botulism, an intoxication rather than an infection, occurs after exposure to one of eight
related neurotoxins produced by certain strains of Clostridium botulinum, a strictly anaerobic, spore-­forming, gram-­positive bacillus
commonly found in soil. Naturally occurring botulism (see Chapter
256) usually follows ingestion of preformed toxin (food poisoning)
or results from intestinal toxin production (infantile botulism). An
aerosol exposure to the toxin would likely result in a case of clinical
botulism indistinguishable from that caused by natural exposures.
Following exposure to botulinum toxin, clinical manifestations
typically begin with bulbar palsies, causing patients to complain of
ptosis, photophobia, and blurred vision resulting from difficulty in
accommodation. Symptoms can progress to include dysarthria, dysphonia, dysphagia, and finally, a descending symmetric paralysis.
Sensation and sensorium are typically not affected. In the absence
of intervention, death often results from respiratory muscle failure.
The mechanism of action of botulinum toxin is, in many ways, the
opposite of that of nerve agent intoxication. Seizures, loss of consciousness, and peripheral twitching and fasciculations, typical of
nerve agent poisoning, are not seen in botulism.

Sudden-­Onset Respiratory Syndrome: Chlorine,
Phosgene, and Cyanide

The acute onset of respiratory symptoms shortly after exposure should
prompt the clinician to consider a range of potential chemical agents. Of
note, nerve agents, discussed previously, may affect respiration via massive
bronchial hypersecretion, bronchospasm, and respiratory muscle paresis. However, the nerve agent casualty will likely have generalized muscle
involvement and central nervous system manifestations. In contrast, the
toxic inhalants chlorine and phosgene produce respiratory distress without neuromuscular involvement or other features of cholinergic crisis. Several other pulmonary toxicants may produce similar clinical toxidromes.
Chlorine is a dense, acrid, yellow-­green gas that is heavier than air.
After mild to moderate exposure, ocular and nasal irritation occurs,
followed by cough, a choking sensation, bronchospasm, and substernal
chest tightness. Pulmonary edema, mediated by hydrochloric acid and
free oxygen radical generation, follows moderate to severe exposures
within 30 minutes to several hours. Hypoxemia and hypovolemia secondary to noncardiogenic pulmonary edema are the factors responsible for death.
Phosgene, like chlorine, is a common industrial compound that
was used as a weapon on the battlefields of World War I. Its odor has
been described as similar to “new-­mown hay.” Like chlorine, phosgene exposure also is thought to result in the generation of hydrochloric acid, contributing particularly to upper airway, nasal, and
conjunctival irritation. Acylation reactions caused by the effects
of phosgene on the pulmonary alveolar-­capillary membrane lead
to pulmonary edema. Phosgene lung injury also may be mediated,
in part, by an inflammatory reaction associated with leukotriene
production. Patients with mild to moderate exposures to phosgene

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 763 u Biological and Chemical Terrorism
may be asymptomatic, a fact that may cause victims to remain in a
contaminated area. Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema or “dry land
drowning” occurs 4-­24 hours after exposure and is dose dependent,
with heavier exposures causing earlier symptoms. Dyspnea may
precede radiologic findings. In severe exposures, pulmonary edema
may be so marked as to result in hypovolemia and hypotension. As
in the case of chlorine, death results from hypoxemia and asphyxia.
Cyanide, by contrast, is a cellular poison capable of causing protean clinical manifestations, not a pulmonary toxicant. Initially, cyanide toxicity is most likely to manifest as tachypnea and hyperpnea,
progressing rapidly to apnea in cases with significant exposure (see
Chapter 94). The efficacy of cyanide as a chemical terrorism agent
is limited by its volatility in open air and relatively low lethality
compared with nerve agents. Released in a closed room, however,
cyanide could have devastating effects, as evidenced by its use in
the Nazi gas chambers during World War II. Cyanide inhibits cytochrome a3, interfering with normal mitochondrial oxidative metabolism and leading to cellular anoxia and lactic acidosis. In addition
to respiratory distress, early findings among cyanide victims include
tachycardia, flushing, dizziness, headache, diaphoresis, nausea, and
vomiting. With greater exposure, seizures, coma, apnea, and cardiac
arrest may follow within minutes. An elevated anion gap metabolic
acidosis is typically present and decreased peripheral oxygen utilization leads to an elevated mixed venous oxygen saturation value.

Delayed-­Onset Respiratory Syndrome: Anthrax,
Plague, Tularemia, and Ricin

A delayed onset of respiratory symptoms (days after exposure) is
characteristic of several infectious diseases and at least one toxin that
might be adapted for sinister purposes by terrorists. Among the most
threatening and problematic of these are anthrax, plague, tularemia,
and ricin.
Anthrax is caused by infection with the gram-­
positive spore-­
forming rod Bacillus anthracis. Its ability to form a spore enables the
anthrax bacillus to survive for long periods in the environment and
enhances its potential as a weapon.
The vast majority of naturally occurring anthrax cases are cutaneous, acquired by close contact with the hides, wool, bone, and
other by-­products of infected ruminants (principally cattle, sheep,
and goats). Cutaneous anthrax is amenable to therapy with a variety
of antibiotics and is readily recognizable to experienced clinicians
in endemic areas; consequently, it is rarely fatal. Although it is common in parts of Asia and sub-­Saharan Africa, only two cases of cutaneous anthrax had occurred in the United States in the 9 years that
preceded the attacks of 2001 (when 11 cutaneous cases were seen).
Gastrointestinal anthrax has been described only once in the United
States, in a drum circle participant whose drum heads were made
from imported animal hides. In general, however, it occurs after the
ingestion of contaminated meat. In the past, inhalational anthrax,
or woolsorters’ disease, was an occupational hazard of abattoir and
textile workers. Now eliminated as a naturally occurring disease in
the United States, it is this inhalational form of anthrax that poses
the greatest terror threat. Following an inadvertent release in 1979
from a bioweapons facility at Sverdlovsk in the former Soviet Union,
66 of 77 (86%) known adult victims of inhalational anthrax died. In
the 2001 attacks involving contaminated mail in the United States,
5 of 11 (46%) patients with inhalational anthrax died. Whether better intensive care modalities, changes in antibiotic therapy, or earlier recognition accounted for this improved mortality rate remains
unknown.
Symptomatic inhalational anthrax typically begins 1-­6 days after
exposure, although incubation periods of up to several weeks have
been reported. The disease begins as a flulike illness, characterized
by fever, myalgia, headache, and cough. A brief intervening period
of improvement sometimes follows, but rapid deterioration then
ensues; high fever, dyspnea, cyanosis, and shock mark this second

4449

phase. Hemorrhagic meningitis occurs in up to 50% of cases. Chest
radiographs obtained late in the course of illness may reveal a widened mediastinum or prominent mediastinal lymphadenopathy;
pleural effusions also may be seen. Bacteremia is often so profound
that Gram stains of peripheral blood may demonstrate the organism at this stage. Prompt treatment is imperative. Death occurs in
as many as 95% of inhalational anthrax cases if such treatment is
begun more than 48 hours after the onset of symptoms.
Whereas inhalational anthrax is a disease primarily of mediastinal
lymphatic tissue, exposure to aerosolized plague bacilli typically leads
to a primary pneumonia. Endemic plague is usually transmitted via
the bites of fleas and is discussed in Chapter 249.3. The causative organism of all forms of human plague, Yersinia pestis, is a bipolar-­staining,
gram-­negative facultative intracellular bacillus. An ability to survive
within the macrophage aids its dissemination to distant sites following
inoculation or inhalation. “Buboes,” markedly swollen, exquisitely tender regional lymph nodes in the distribution of a bite, are the hallmark
feature of bubonic plague. Fever and malaise are typically present, and
septicemia often develops as bacteria gain access to the circulation.
Petechiae, purpura, and overwhelming disseminated intravascular
coagulopathy commonly occur, and 80% of bubonic plague victims
ultimately have positive blood cultures. Plague is extremely lethal, as
illustrated by the fact that the “Black Death” eliminated one-­third of the
population of Europe during the Middle Ages.
Intentional aerosol dissemination of Y. pestis would likely result in
a preponderance of pneumonic plague cases. Pneumonic plague may
also arise secondarily after seeding of the lungs of septicemic patients.
Symptoms include fever, chills, malaise, headache, and cough. Chest
radiographs may reveal a patchy consolidation, and the classic clinical
finding is blood-­streaked sputum. Disseminated intravascular coagulation and overwhelming sepsis typically develop as the disease progresses. Untreated pneumonic plague has a fatality rate approaching
100%.
Tularemia is a highly infectious disease caused by the gram-­negative
coccobacillus Francisella tularensis. Naturally occurring tularemia is
discussed in Chapter 252. The high degree of infectivity of F. tularensis
(<10 organisms are thought to be necessary to produce infection via
inhalation), as well as its survivability in the environment, contributes
to its inclusion on the CDC’s list of Category A agents. Several clinical forms of endemic tularemia are known, but inhalational exposure
resulting from a terrorist attack would likely lead to a plaguelike primary pneumonia or to typhoidal tularemia, manifesting as a variety of
nonspecific symptoms, including fever, malaise, and abdominal pain.
Ricin is a protein toxin derived from the castor bean plant (Ricinus
communis) that inhibits ribosomal protein synthesis. It is highly toxic
in animal studies when inhaled and may result in the delayed onset of
respiratory distress, pulmonary edema, and acute respiratory failure.
If injected, it may cause a sepsis-­like syndrome that may progress to
multiorgan system failure; ingestion can lead to severe gastroenteritis.
Ricin-­containing letters were mailed to a U.S. Senate office building
in 2004, to President Obama and New York City Mayor Bloomberg
in 2013, and to President Trump in 2020, although no persons were
sickened in any of the attacks.

Intermediate-­Onset Dermatologic Syndrome:
Mustard and Lewisite

The development of skin lesions within hours to days of exposure is characteristic of the chemical vesicants. These compounds, often referred to
as blistering agents, are cellular poisons and include the alkylating agent
mustard and the organic arsenical agent lewisite. Injury to rapidly reproducing cells begins within minutes of contact with these agents. Clinical
effects typically become evident several hours after exposure to mustard,
whereas patients exposed to lewisite feel immediate pain. Both mustard
and lewisite affect the eyes and respiratory tract, and their inadvertent
ingestion may produce significant gastrointestinal symptoms. Mustard
exposure may lead, several days later, to bone marrow suppression. With

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4450 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
a large inhalational challenge, mustard may also cause an acute respiratory syndrome, particularly affecting the upper airway and presenting with
laryngospasm and stridor.

Delayed-­Onset Dermatologic Syndrome: Smallpox

The appearance of an exanthem days to weeks after exposure is likely
to be a presenting feature of smallpox. Caused by infection with variola
virus, a member of the Orthopoxvirus family, smallpox has an incubation period of 7-­17 days. This would likely permit the wide dispersal
of asymptomatic exposed persons, thus contributing to the spread of
an outbreak. During the incubation period, the virus replicates in the
upper respiratory tract. A primary viremia ensues, during which time
seeding of the liver and spleen occurs. A secondary viremia then develops, the skin is seeded, and the classic exanthem of smallpox appears.
Symptoms of smallpox begin abruptly during the phase of secondary viremia and include fever, rigors, vomiting, headache, backache,
and extreme malaise. Within 2-­4 days, macules appear on the face
and extremities and then progress in synchronous fashion to papules,
pustules, and finally scabs. As the scabs separate, survivors often are
left with disfiguring, depigmented scars. The synchronous nature of
the rash and its centrifugal distribution distinguish smallpox from
chickenpox, which has a centripetal distribution. Historically, smallpox had a 30% mortality rate, with death typically resulting from visceral organ involvement.

DIAGNOSIS

In some cases, the terrorist nature of a chemical or biologic attack
may be obvious; for example, a chemical attack in which victims
succumb in close temporal and geographic proximity to a dispersal
device or when terrorists announce their attack. In other instances,
the clinician may need to rely on epidemiologic clues to suspect
an intentional release of chemical or biologic agents. The presence
of large numbers of victims clustered in time and space should
raise the index of suspicion, as should cases of unexpected death or
unexpectedly severe disease. Diseases unusual in a given locale, in
a given age group, or during a certain season likewise may warrant
further investigation. Simultaneous outbreaks of a disease in noncontiguous areas should cause one to consider an intentional release
(as in the 2001 mail-­borne anthrax attacks), as should outbreaks of
multiple diseases in the same area. Even a single case of a rare disorder such as anthrax or certain viral hemorrhagic fevers would be
suspicious, and a single case of smallpox would almost certainly be
the result of an intentional dissemination. Large numbers of dying
animals might provide evidence of an unnatural aerosol release, as
would evidence of disparate attack rates between those known to be
indoors and outdoors at a given time.
In a mass casualty setting, diagnoses may be made largely on clinical
grounds. The diagnosis of nerve agent intoxication is based primarily on clinical recognition and patient response to antidotal therapy.
Several simple rapid detection devices developed for military use can
detect the presence of nerve agents in the environment. Some of these
are now commercially available and are stocked in certain emergency
departments and public safety vehicles. Measurements of acetylcholinesterase in plasma or erythrocytes of nerve agent victims may be
helpful in long-­term prognostication, but the correlation between cholinesterase levels and clinical effects is often poor, and the test is rarely
available on an emergency basis.
Botulism should be suspected clinically among patients presenting
with a symmetric, descending, flaccid paralysis. Although the differential diagnosis of botulism includes other uncommon neurologic disorders, such as myasthenia gravis and the Guillain-­Barré syndrome, the
presence of multiple casualties with similar symptoms should aid in the
determination of a botulism outbreak. Electromyography is useful in
supporting the diagnosis.
Initially the diagnosis of cyanide poisoning also will likely
be made on clinical grounds in the presence of the appropriate

toxidrome. An unusually high anion gap metabolic acidosis with
elevated serum lactate and an oxygen concentration greater than
expected in mixed venous blood lend support to the clinical diagnosis. Elevated blood cyanide concentrations can confirm the clinical suspicion.
Of all the chemical and biological agents, the only ones for which
immediate therapy without waiting for definitive diagnosis is potentially lifesaving and mandatory are nerve agents and cyanide poisoning. If these are suspected, they should be treated before waiting for
further diagnostic certainty.
Anthrax should be suspected upon finding gram-­positive bacilli
in skin biopsy material (in the case of cutaneous disease), blood
smears, pleural fluid, or spinal fluid. Chest radiographs demonstrating a widened mediastinum in the context of fever and constitutional signs and, in the absence of another obvious explanation
(e.g., blunt trauma or postsurgical infection), should also lead one
to consider the diagnosis. Confirmation can be obtained by blood
culture.
A diagnosis of plague can be suspected on finding bipolar “safety-­
pin”–staining bacilli in Gram or Wayson stains of sputum or aspirated
lymph node material; confirmation is obtained by culturing Y. pestis
from blood, sputum, or lymph node aspirate. The organism grows on
standard blood or MacConkey TRA agars, but it is often misidentified
by automated systems. F. tularensis, the causative agent of tularemia,
grows poorly on standard media; its growth is enhanced on media containing cysteine. Because of its extreme infectivity, however, many laboratories prefer to make a diagnosis via polymerase chain reaction or
serologically using an enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assay or serum
agglutination assay.
Smallpox should be suspected on clinical grounds and can be confirmed by culture or electron microscopy of scabs or vesicular fluid,
although the manipulation of clinical material from suspected smallpox victims should be attempted only at public health laboratories able
to employ maximum biocontainment (Biosafety Level 4) precautions.
Similar caution should be exercised with specimens from patients with
various viral hemorrhagic fevers.

PREVENTION

Preventive measures can be considered in both a preexposure and
a postexposure context. Preexposure protection against a chemical
or biologic attack may consist of physical, chemical, or immunologic measures. Physical protection against primary attack often
involves gas masks and protective suits; such equipment is used by
the military and by certain hazardous materials response teams, but
it is unlikely to be available to civilians at the precise moment that
a release occurs. Medical personnel need to understand the principles of physical protection as they apply to infection control and
the spread of contamination.
Pneumonic plague is spread through respiratory droplets. Droplet precautions, including the use of simple surgical masks, are thus
warranted for providers caring for patients with plague. Smallpox
is transmitted by droplet nuclei. Airborne precautions, including
(ideally) a high-­efficiency particulate air filter mask, are thus warranted with smallpox victims. Patients with certain viral hemorrhagic fevers, such as those caused by filoviruses (Ebola, Marburg)
and arenaviruses, should be managed using a combination of droplet and contact precautions, ideally in a specialized biocontainment unit. Most other biologic agent victims can be safely cared
for with the use of standard precautions. In the case of chemical
agents, residual mustard or nerve agent on the skin or clothing of
victims might potentially pose a hazard to medical personnel. For
such victims, whenever possible, clothing should be removed, and
the patients decontaminated using copious amounts of water before
extensive medical care is rendered. Most other chemical agents are
volatile enough that spread of an agent among patients or from
patient to caregiver is unlikely.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 763 u Biological and Chemical Terrorism
Preexposure chemical prophylaxis might be used on the basis
of credible intelligence reports. Should officials deem that the
threatened release of a specific biologic agent appears imminent,
antibiotics might be distributed to a population before exposure.
Opportunities to employ such a strategy are likely to be limited,
although federal and state officials are examining various mechanisms for such employment. In military settings, pyridostigmine is
FDA-­approved as pretreatment against expected nerve agent attack.
It is not approved for use in children, and it is not likely to be recommended in civilian settings.
Although licensed vaccines (preexposure immunologic measures) against anthrax and smallpox have been developed, widespread use of either vaccine is likely to be problematic, especially in
children. The anthrax vaccine is licensed only for those persons age
18 years and older, is given as a five-­dose series over 18 months, and
requires annual booster doses. These considerations make civilian
employment of the current anthrax vaccine on a large scale unlikely,
although recombinant anthrax vaccines requiring fewer doses are in
development.
Significant obstacles to the widespread employment of smallpox
vaccine also exist, although public health officials have contemplated
the resumption of a smallpox vaccination campaign. Whereas in the
past, the live replicating smallpox vaccine (prepared from vaccinia
virus, an Orthopoxvirus related to variola) was used safely and successfully in young infants, it has a relatively high rate of serious complications in certain patients. Fetal vaccinia and demise can occur when
pregnant women are vaccinated. Vaccinia gangrenosa, an often fatal
complication, can occur when immunocompromised persons are vaccinated. Eczema vaccinatum occurs in those with preexisting dermatoses (atopic dermatitis). Severe vaccine-­related encephalitis was well
known during the era of widespread vaccination; because it occurs
only in primary vaccines, it would disproportionately affect pediatric
patients. Autoinoculation can occur when the virus present at the site
of vaccination is manually transferred to other areas of skin or to the
eye. Young children would presumably be at greater risk for such inadvertent transmission. Myocarditis has been reported following vaccinations of military recruits. A new nonreplicating vaccine may alleviate
some of these concerns.
To manage complications associated with use of the replicating vaccine, vaccinia immune globulin should be available when one is undertaking a vaccination campaign. Vaccinia immune globulin (6000 U/kg
intravenously) may be given to vaccine recipients who experience
severe complications or to significantly immunocompromised individuals exposed to smallpox and in whom vaccination would be unsafe.
In 2018, tecovirimat was approved by the FDA for the treatment of
persons (including children) experiencing severe complications from
vaccine. Vaccine, as well as vaccinia immune globulin and tecovirimat,
can be obtained as needed upon consultation with officials at the CDC.
In addition to a potential role in preexposure prophylaxis, vaccination
may be effective in postexposure prophylaxis if given within the first 4
days after exposure.
Anthrax vaccine might similarly be employed in a postexposure setting. Some authorities recommend three doses of this vaccine as an
adjunct to postexposure chemoprophylaxis after documented exposure to aerosolized anthrax spores. Nonetheless, postexposure administration of oral antibiotics constitutes the mainstay of management for
asymptomatic victims believed to have been exposed to anthrax as well
as to other bacterial agents such as plague and tularemia. Table 763.2
lists appropriate prophylactic regimens for various biologic exposures.

TREATMENT

Although Tables 763.2, 763.3, and 763.4 provide recommended
therapies for overt diseases caused by various chemical and biologic
agents, it is likely that the clinician attending to victims will need to
make therapeutic decisions before the results of confirmatory diagnostic tests are available and in situations in which the diagnosis is

4451

not known with certainty. In particular, decontamination by hospital
personnel in appropriate personal protective equipment is required
for patients exposed to chemical agents who have not been adequately
decontaminated in the prehospital setting (see Table 763.4). In such
cases, it is useful to note that many diseases and symptoms caused by
chemical and biologic agents will resolve with supportive care. Most
cases of chlorine or phosgene exposure can be successfully managed
by providing meticulous attention to oxygenation and fluid balance.
Mustard victims may require intensive multisystem support, but no
specific antidote or therapy is available. Many viral diseases, including
most viral hemorrhagic fevers, as well as equine encephalitides, are also
managed supportively.
In addition to ensuring adequate oxygenation, ventilation, and
hydration, the clinician may need to provide specific empiric therapies on an urgent basis. Patients suffering from the sudden onset of
severe neuromuscular symptoms may have nerve agent intoxication
and should be given atropine (0.05-0.1 mg/kg) promptly for its antimuscarinic effects. Although atropine relieves bronchospasm and
bradycardia, reduces bronchial secretions, and ameliorates the gastrointestinal effects of nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea, it does not improve
skeletal muscle paralysis. 2-­Pralidoxime chloride (2-­PAM) cleaves the
organophosphate moiety from cholinesterase and regenerates intact
enzyme if “aging” has not occurred. The effect is most prominent at
the neuromuscular junction and leads to improved muscle strength.
Its prompt use (at a dose of 25-50 mg/kg) as an adjunct to atropine is
recommended in all serious cases.
Ideally, both atropine and pralidoxime should be administered
intravenously (IV) in severe cases, although the intraosseous route is
acceptable. In the field, as time is of the essence in treating nerve agent
poisoning, first responders are trained to administer atropine IM via
autoinjector. Some experts also recommend that atropine be given IM
in the presence of hypoxia to avoid arrhythmias associated with IV
administration. Many emergency management services stock military-­
style autoinjector kits consisting of atropine and 2-­PAM for IM injection. Pediatric atropine autoinjectors containing 0.5 or 1 mg of atropine
are licensed and held in the Strategic National Stockpile, although kits
intended for adults (with 2 mg of atropine and 600 mg of pralidoxime)
may be used in children >2-­3 years of age (Table 763.5). Autoinjectors
cannot easily be used in the smallest infants.
Animal studies support the routine prophylactic administration
of anticonvulsant doses of benzodiazepines, even in the absence of
observable convulsive activity. Although diazepam has long been
employed for this purpose, midazolam was recently granted FDA
approval, and animal studies have shown it to have superior efficacy in treating acute nerve agent poisoning. Military and civilian
stocks of diazepam autoinjectors are being replaced by midazolam
autoinjectors.
Delayed neuromuscular symptoms in the setting of terrorism might
be due to botulism. Supportive care, with meticulous attention to ventilatory support, is the mainstay of botulism treatment. Such support
may be necessary for several months, making the management of a
large-­scale botulism outbreak especially problematic in terms of medical resources. A licensed heptavalent antitoxin (types A-­G) is available
through the CDC (1-­800-­232-­4636). Administration of this antitoxin
is unlikely to reverse disease in symptomatic patients but may prevent further progression. In addition, a pentavalent product (containing antibody against toxin types A-­E but licensed only for treatment
of type A or B intoxication), Botulism Immune Globulin Intravenous
(Human; BabyBIG), is available through the California Department
of Health Services (1-­510-231-­7600) specifically for the treatment of
infant botulism.
The rapid onset of respiratory symptoms may signal an exposure to
chlorine, phosgene, cyanide, or a number of other toxic industrial chemicals. Although the mainstay of therapy in virtually all of these exposures
consists of removal to fresh air and intensive supportive care, cyanide
intoxication often requires the administration of specific antidotes.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4452 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
Table 763.2  CDC Category A Agents of Bioterrorism
CLINICAL
FINDINGS

INCUBATION
PERIOD (DAYS)

ISOLATION
PRECAUTIONS

INITIAL TREATMENT

PROPHYLAXIS

Anthrax
(inhalational)
Patients who
are clinically
stable after
14 days can
be switched
to a single
oral agent
(as described
in the
prophylaxis
section of
this table) to
complete a
60-­day course

Febrile prodrome
with rapid
progression
to mediastinal
lymphadenitis
and mediastinitis,
sepsis, shock, and
meningitis

1-­5

Standard

See Table 763.3.

Ciprofloxacin 30 mg/
kg/day PO divided
q12h* (max 500 mg/
dose) or doxycycline
4.4 mg/kg/day PO
divided q12h (max
100 mg/dose) or
clindamycin 30 mg/kg
/day PO divided q8h
(max 900 mg/dose) or
levofloxacin 16 mg/kg/
day PO divided q12h
(max 250 mg/dose) or
amoxicillin 75 mg/kg/
day PO divided q8h†
(max 1 g/dose) or
penicillin VK 50-­75 mg/
kg/day divided q6-­8h

Plague
(pneumonic)

Febrile prodrome
with rapid
progression
to fulminant
pneumonia,
hemoptysis, sepsis,
disseminated
intravascular
coagulation

2-­3

Droplet (for first 3 days
of therapy)

Gentamicin** 1.25- 2.5 mg/kg IV Doxycycline 2.2 mg/kg
q8h or doxycycline 2.2 mg/kg
PO q12h or
IV q12h or ciprofloxacin 15 mg/kg
ciprofloxacin 20 mg/kg
IV q12h or levofloxacin 8 mg/kg
PO q12h or
IV/PO q12h
levofloxacin 8 mg/kg
PO q12h

Tularemia

Pneumonic: abrupt
onset of fever
with fulminant
pneumonia
Typhoidal: fever,
malaise, abdominal
pain

2-­10

Standard

Options same as for plague‡,
gentamicin preferred

Same as for plague‡

Smallpox

Febrile prodrome
with synchronous,
centrifugal,
vesiculopustular
exanthema

7-­17

Airborne (+ contact)

Tecovirimat
Oral dosage by body weight:
13 kg to <25 kg: 200 mg q12h
25 kg to <40 kg: 400 mg q12h
40 kg to <120 kg: 600 mg q12h
≥120 kg: 600 mg q8h
Intravenous infusion dosage by
body weight:
3 kg to <35 kg: 6 mg/kg q12h by
IV infusion over 6 hr
35 kg to <120 kg: 200 mg q12h
by IV infusion over 6 hr
≥120 kg: 300 mg q12h by IV
infusion over 6 hr

Vaccination may be
effective if given
within the first several
days after exposure

Botulism

Afebrile descending
symmetric flaccid
paralysis with
cranial nerve
palsies

1-­5

Standard

Supportive care; antitoxin (see
text) may halt the progression
of symptoms but is unlikely to
reverse them

No licensed
preexposure
prophylaxis
is available;
postexposure
administration of
antitoxin may prevent
the development of
symptoms

Viral
hemorrhagic
fevers

Febrile prodrome
with rapid
progression to
shock, purpura,
and bleeding
diatheses

4-­21

Contact (consider
airborne in
cases of massive
hemorrhage)

Supportive care; ribavirin may
be beneficial in treating Lassa
fever, and perhaps other
arenaviral hemorrhagic fevers

Ribavirin has been
shown to be
efficacious in the
postexposure
prophylaxis of Lassa
fever

DISEASE

*Preferred drugs are shown in bold.
**Some experts say 4.5-7.5 mg/kg/day.
†Penicillin and amoxicillin should only be used when the strain of Bacillus anthracis is known to be susceptible.
‡Levofloxacin (as well as moxifloxacin) is licensed by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for the prophylaxis and treatment of plague in the setting of a bioterror attack, but not tularemia.
PO, By mouth; IV, intravenously.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 763 u Biological and Chemical Terrorism

4453

Table 763.3  Treatment of Inhalational Anthrax in Children
WHEN MENINGITIS PRESENT OR HAS NOT RULED OUT*

WHEN MENINGITIS CAN BE RULED OUT*

1.	A bactericidal fluoroquinolone:
Ciprofloxacin 30 mg/kg/day IV divided q8h† (max 400 mg/dose) or
Levofloxacin 24 mg/kg/day IV divided q12h (max 250 mg/dose) or
Moxifloxacin 12 mg/kg/day IV divided q12h (max 200 mg/dose; for
children 3 mo to 2 yr); 10 mg/kg/day IV divided q12h (for children 2-­5
yr); 8 mg/kg/day IV divided q12h (for children 6-­11 yr); 400 mg IV qd
(for children >12 yr and >45 kg)

1.	A bactericidal antimicrobial:
Ciprofloxacin 30 mg/kg/day IV divided q8h (max 400 mg/dose) or
Levofloxacin 20 mg/kg/day IV divided q12h (max 250 mg/dose) or
Imipenem 100 mg/kg/day IV divided q6h (max 1 g/dose) or
Vancomycin 60 mg/kg/day IV divided q8h or
Penicillin G 400,000 U/kg/day IV divided q4h (max 4 MU/dose) [if PCN
sensitive] or
Ampicillin 200 mg/kg/day IV divided q6h (max 3 g/dose)

2.	A second bactericidal antimicrobial:
Meropenem 120 mg/kg/day IV divided q8h (max 2 g/dose) or
Imipenem 100 mg/kg/day IV divided q6h (max 1 g/dose) or
Doripenem 120 mg/kg/day IV divided q8h (max 1 g/dose) or
Vancomycin 60 mg/kg/day IV divided q8h or
Penicillin G** 400,000 U/kg/day IV divided q4h‡ (max 4 MU/dose) [if
PCN sensitive] or Ampicillin 400 mg/kg/day IV divided q6h (max
3 g/dose)
3.	A protein synthesis inhibitor:
Linezolid 30 mg/kg/day IV divided q8h (for children <12 yr); 30 mg/
kg/day IV divided q12h (for children >12 yr; max 600 mg/dose) or
Clindamycin 40 mg/kg/day IV divided q8h (max 900 mg/dose) or
Rifampin 20/mg/kg/day IV divided q12h (max 300 mg/dose) or
Chloramphenicol 100 mg/kg/day IV divided q6h

2.	A protein synthesis inhibitor:
Clindamycin 40 mg/kg/day IV divided q8h (max 900 mg/dose) or
Linezolid 30 mg/kg/day IV divided q8h (for children <12 yr); 30 mg/kg/
day IV divided q12h (for children >12 yr; max 600 mg/dose) or
Rifampin 20/mg/kg/day IV divided q12h (max 300 mg/dose) or
Doxycycline 4.4 mg/kg/day IV loading dose (for children <45 kg; max
200 mg), followed by 4.4 mg/kg/day IV divided q12h; 200 mg IV
loading dose, followed by 100 mg IV q12h (for children >45 kg)

*Meningitis occurs in approximately 50% of patients with inhalational anthrax.
**Some experts provide a range of 400,000–600,000 U/kg/d.
†Preferred drugs are shown in bold.

‡Penicillin and amoxicillin should only be used when the strain of Bacillus anthracis is known to be susceptible.

IV, Intravenous; qd, every day; PCN, penicillin.
Data from Bradley JS, Peacock G, Krug SE, et al. Pediatric anthrax clinical management. Pediatrics. 2014;133:e1411–e1436. Appendices 3 & 4.

The classic cyanide antidote utilizes a nitrite along with sodium
thiosulfate and is given in two stages. The methemoglobin-­forming
agent (e.g., sodium nitrite) is administered first, because methemoglobin has a high affinity for cyanide and causes it to dissociate from cytochrome oxidase. Nitrite dosing in children should be
based on body weight to avoid excessive methemoglobin formation
and nitrite-­induced hypotension. For the same reasons, nitrites
should be infused slowly over 5-­10 minutes. A sulfur donor, such as
sodium thiosulfate, is given next. This compound is used as a substrate by the hepatic enzyme rhodanese, which converts cyanide to
thiocyanate, a less toxic compound excreted in the urine. Thiosulfate treatment itself is efficacious and relatively benign and may be
used alone for mild to moderate cases. Sodium nitrite and sodium
thiosulfate are packaged together in standard antidote kits, along
with amyl nitrite, a sodium nitrite substitute that can be inhaled in
prehospital settings in which IV access is not available.
Many first responder agencies in the United States have replaced
the traditional two-­part cyanide antidote kit with hydroxocobalamin,
which exchanges its hydroxy group for cyanide, forming harmless cyanocobalamin (vitamin B12) that is subsequently excreted by the kidneys. Hydroxocobalamin use is not complicated by the potential for
nitrite-­induced hypotension or methemoglobinemia, and it has low
toxicity. The recommended dose is 5 g in adults or 70 mg/kg in children, administered IV over 15 minutes. A second dose (5 g in adults; 70
mg/kg in children) may be repeated in severely affected patients. Side
effects include modest hypertension and reddening of skin, mucous
membranes, and urine that may last several days. Although no human
controlled trials are currently available to compare hydroxocobalamin
with nitrite/thiosulfate-­based therapies, many authorities believe that
hydroxocobalamin’s efficacy and safety profile favor it as the cyanide
antidote of choice, especially for children in the mass casualty context.
To use hydroxocobalamin, however, the solution must be mixed immediately before use, in the field if need be, so first responders need to be
properly trained to employ it.

Animal research suggests a modest benefit of steroid therapy in
mitigating lung injury after chlorine inhalation; thus steroids may be
considered for patients with chlorine exposure, especially as an adjunct
to bronchodilators in those with bronchospasm and/or a history of
asthma. Symptomatic relief has also been reported following chlorine
exposure with nebulized 3.75% sodium bicarbonate therapy, though
the impact of this regimen on pulmonary damage is unknown. Animal
models have also suggested a benefit from antiinflammatory agents,
including ibuprofen and N-­acetylcysteine, which appear to ameliorate
phosgene-­induced pulmonary edema, as well as the utilization of low
tidal volume ventilation (protective ventilation), although the results of
such interventions have not yet been reported in clinical trials.
In cases in which the delayed onset of respiratory symptoms may
be the result of a terrorist attack, consideration should be given
to the empirical administration of an antibiotic effective against
anthrax, plague, and tularemia. Ciprofloxacin (10-­15 mg/kg IV
q12 hours), levofloxacin (8 mg/kg IV q12 hours), or doxycycline
(2.2 mg/kg IV q12 hours) is a reasonable choice. Although naturally occurring strains of B. anthracis usually are quite sensitive to
penicillin G, these agents are chosen because penicillin-­resistant
strains of B. anthracis exist. Moreover, ciprofloxacin and doxycycline are effective against almost all known strains of Y. pestis and
F. tularensis. Concerns about inducible β-­lactamases in B. anthracis have led experts to recommend one to two additional antibiotics in patients with inhalational anthrax. Rifampin, vancomycin,
penicillin or ampicillin, clindamycin, and imipenem are reasonable
choices based on in vitro sensitivity data. Because B. anthracis relies
on the production of two protein toxins, edema toxin and lethal
toxin, for its virulence, drugs that act at the ribosome to disrupt
protein synthesis (e.g., clindamycin, the macrolides) provide a theoretical advantage. Frequent meningeal involvement among inhalational anthrax victims makes agents with superior central nervous
system penetration desirable. The treatment of anthrax is detailed
in Table 763.3.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4454 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
Table 763.4  Critical Chemical Agents of Terrorism
AGENT

TOXICITY

NERVE AGENTS
Tabun, sarin,
Anticholinesterase:
soman, VX
muscarinic,
nicotinic, central
nervous system
effects

VESICANTS
Mustard

Alkylation

Lewisite

Arsenical

PULMONARY AGENTS
Chlorine,
Liberate
phosgene
hydrochloric acid,
alkylation

CLINICAL
FINDINGS

ONSET

DECONTAMINATION*

MANAGEMENT

Vapor: miosis,
rhinorrhea, dyspnea
Liquid: diaphoresis,
vomiting
Both: coma, paralysis,
seizures, apnea

Seconds: vapor
Minutes to
hours: liquid

Vapor: fresh air, remove
clothes, wash hair
Liquid: remove clothes,
wash skin, hair with
copious soap and
water, ocular irrigation

ABCs. Atropine: 0.05-0.1 mg/kg
IV†, IM‡ (min: 0.1 mg, max: 5 mg),
repeat q2-­5 min prn for marked
secretions, bronchospasm
AND
Pralidoxime: 25-50 mg/kg IV, IM§
(max: 1 g IV; 2 g IM), may repeat
within 30-­60 min prn, then again
q1h for one or two doses prn for
persistent weakness, high atropine
requirement
AND
Diazepam: 0.3 mg/kg (max: 10 mg)
IV or Lorazepam: 0.1 mg/kg IV, IM
(max: 4 mg) or Midazolam: 0.2 mg/
kg (max: 10 mg) IM prn for seizures
or severe exposure

Skin: erythema,
vesicles
Eye: inflammation
Respiratory tract:
inflammation

Hours

Skin: soap and water
Eyes: water (effective
only if done within
minutes of exposure)

Symptomatic care

Immediate pain

Skin: soap and water
Eyes: water (effective
only if done within
minutes of exposure)

Possibly British antilewisite (BAL)
3 mg/kg IM q4-­6h for systemic
effects of lewisite in severe cases

Eye, nose, and throat
irritation (especially
chlorine)
Respiratory:
bronchospasm,
pulmonary
edema (especially
phosgene)

Minutes:
eye, nose,
and throat
irritation,
bronchospasm
Hours:
pulmonary
edema

Fresh air
Skin: water

Symptomatic care (see text)

Tachypnea, coma,
seizures, apnea

Seconds

Fresh air

ABCs, 100% oxygen

Skin: soap and water

Na bicarbonate prn metabolic
acidosis; hydroxocobalamin
70 mg/kg IV (max: 5 g) or nitrite/
thiosulfate, given as follows (see
text):

CYANIDE
Cytochrome
oxidase
Inhibition: cellular
anoxia, lactic
acidosis

Na nitrite (3%):
dose (mL/kg)
(max: 10 mL)

Estimated
hemoglobin
concentration
(g/dL)

0.27

10

0.33

12 (estimated
for average
child)

0.39

14

Followed by
Na thiosulfate
(25%): 1.65 mL/
kg (max: 50 mL)
*Decontamination, especially for patients with significant nerve agent or vesicant exposure, should be performed by healthcare providers garbed in adequate personal protective
equipment. For emergency department staff, this equipment consists of a nonencapsulated, chemically resistant body suit, boots, and gloves with a full-­face air-­purifier mask/hood.
†Intraosseous route is likely equivalent to intravenous.
‡Atropine might have some benefit via endotracheal tube or inhalation, as might aerosolized ipratropium. See also Table 741.5.
§Pralidoxime is reconstituted to 50 mg/mL (1 g in 20 mL water) for IV administration, and the total dose infused over 30 min, or may be given by continuous infusion (loading dose
25 mg/kg over 30 min, and then 10 mg/kg/hr). For IM use, it might be diluted to a concentration of 300 mg/mL (1 g added to 3 mL water—by analogy to the U.S. Army’s Mark 1
autoinjector concentration) to effect a reasonable volume for injection. See also Table 741.5.
ABCs, Airway, breathing, and circulatory support; IM, intramuscularly; IV, intravenously; max, maximum; min, minimum; prn, as needed.
Adapted from Henretig FH, Cieslak TJ, Eitzen EM. Biological and chemical terrorism. J Pediatr. 2002;141:311–326.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 763 u Biological and Chemical Terrorism

4455

Table 763.5  Pediatric Autoinjector Recommendations for Mass Casualties or Prehospital Care*
ATROPINE AUTOINJECTOR THERAPY
APPROXIMATE AGE

APPROXIMATE WEIGHT (KG)

AUTOINJECTOR SIZE (MG)

<6 mo

<7.5

0.25

6 mo to 4 years

7.5-­18

0.5

5-­10 years

18-­30

1.0

>10 years

>30

2.0

APPROXIMATE WEIGHT (KG)

NUMBER OF AUTOINJECTORS

PRALIDOXIME DOSE (MG/KG)

3-­7

13-­25

1

24-­46

8-­14

26-­50

2

24-­46

>14

>50

3

<35

PRALIDOXIME AUTOINJECTOR THERAPY
APPROXIMATE AGE (YEARS)

*Consider adult pralidoxime autoinjector use for severely affected mass casualties when intravenous (IV) access or more precise mg/kg intramuscular (IM) dosing is logistically
impractical. The initial dose using atropine autoinjectors is one autoinjector of each recommended size. The initial dose using pralidoxime autoinjectors is the recommended number
of (adult-­intended, 600 mg) autoinjectors. These latter may also be injected into an empty sterile vile; the contents redrawn through a filter needle into a small syringe may then
provide a ready source of concentrated (300 mg/mL) pralidoxime solution for IM injection to infants. Autoinjectors may become available that provide adult doses of both atropine
and pralidoxime in one injector; these could be used in children ≥3 years in lieu of two individual injectors and dosed as noted above for pralidoxime alone.

Raxibacumab, a monoclonal antibody that inhibits anthrax antigen
binding to cell receptors, thus preventing toxins from entering cells,
is approved for the treatment of inhalation anthrax in combination
with antibiotics, as is obiltoxaximab, which neutralizes anthrax toxins.
The adult dose of raxibacumab is 40 mg/kg given IV over 2 hours and
15 minutes. The dose for children is weight based: ≤15 kg, 80 mg/kg;
>15-­50 kg, 60 mg/kg; >50 kg, 40 mg/kg. Premedication with diphenhydramine IV or by mouth (PO) is recommended 1 hour before the
infusion.
In patients with an established diagnosis of tularemia, gentamicin
(5 mg/kg IV/IM divided 2 or 3 times/day) is the preferred choice for
therapy due to the limited availability of streptomycin (15 mg/kg
IM q12 hours). Bioterrorism-­related plague should be treated with
two distinct antibiotic classes until sensitivity patterns are known;
gentamicin, streptomycin, ciprofloxacin, and levofloxacin are all
approved agents for treatment of pneumonic plague in children (see
Table 763.2). To be effective, therapy for pneumonic plague must
be initiated within 24 hours of the onset of symptoms. There is
little clinical experience with ricin-­induced pulmonary injury. The
mainstay of therapy is expected to be supportive care.
The management of vesicant-­induced injury is similar to that
for burn victims and is largely symptomatic (see Chapter 89). The
major difference between thermal burns and vesicant burns is that
vesicant casualties do not need the large volumes of fluid required
by thermal burn victims, as their epidermis remains intact. These
patients are at risk of overhydration if treated using thermal burn
protocols. Mustard victims will benefit from the application of
soothing skin lotions such as calamine and the administration of
analgesics. Early intubation of severely exposed patients is warranted to guard against edematous airway compromise. Oxygen and
mechanical ventilation may be needed, and meticulous attention to
hydration is of paramount importance. Ongoing research suggests
a role for oral N-­acetylcysteine in mitigating chronic pulmonary
effects due to mustard injury. Lewisite victims can be managed in
much the same manner as mustard victims. Dimercaprol (British

antilewisite) in peanut oil, given IM, may help ameliorate the systemic effects of lewisite, although few hospitals or pharmacies are
likely to have this drug on hand.
The management of symptomatic smallpox victims also is largely
supportive, with attention to pain control, hydration status, and
respiratory sufficiency of primary importance. The parenteral
antiviral compound cidofovir, licensed for the treatment of cytomegalovirus retinitis in HIV-­infected patients, has in vitro efficacy
against variola and other orthopoxviruses. Its utility in treating
smallpox victims is untested. Moreover, in the face of a large outbreak of disease, wide parenteral use of this drug would be problematic. Tecovirimat demonstrates excellent in vitro activity against
orthopoxviruses, but its utility in treating patients with smallpox is
likewise untested.
In all chemical casualties, but especially if a liquid agent such as
VX or mustard is suspected, decontamination is crucial and should
be considered a primary medical intervention. Although this has
been part of casualty doctrine in the civilian and military environments for decades, a 2016 study showed that disrobing eliminated
90% of contamination in normal volunteers; following this with
showering using water or soap and water eliminated 99% of contamination. This has huge implications for the hospital management of possibly contaminated casualties, including children, and
hospitals must plan to execute the decontamination mission at all
levels.
For those faced with an acute chemical emergency, especially a mass
casualty situation, a useful resource is the Chemical Hazard Emergency
Medical Management website (https://chemm.hhs.gov), maintained by
the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response within the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services. Among its features is a
decision support tool, CHEMM-­IST, which aids in identification of the
chemical a patient was exposed to.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4456 Part XXXII u Environmental Health

Chapter 764

Mass Psychogenic Illness
Jonathan W. Mink
Mass psychogenic illness refers to the rapid spread of illness signs and
symptoms affecting members of a cohesive group, originating from
a nervous system disturbance involving excitation, loss, or alteration
of function, whereby physical complaints that are exhibited unconsciously have no corresponding organic etiology. Mass psychogenic illness shares features in common with conversion disorder (functional
neurologic system disorder) (see Chapter 35) in that the symptoms
are not consciously produced and are typically sensorimotor in nature.
The physical symptoms are associated with significant distress and
impairment; they commonly interfere with function at school or home
and affect peer relationships. Some experts have argued that “functional” is a better used term than “psychogenic” because it does not
imply etiology and does not reinforce dualist thinking about the mind
being separate from the brain.
Much less is known about the biologic underpinnings and clinical
features of mass psychogenic illness than is known about conversion
disorder and other somatic symptom disorders. However, there are
some important features in common with conversion disorder. These
include sudden abrupt onset, inconsistency with known anatomy and
physiology, atypical features, and inconsistency of symptoms over
time. Specific features of mass psychogenic illness are the occurrence of
these symptoms in a cohesive group; the presence of increased anxiety;
spread of symptoms via sight, sound, or oral communication (including social media); and a high female:male ratio.

CLINICAL FEATURES AND DIAGNOSIS

There are many examples of mass psychogenic illness throughout
history. The best known is perhaps that of the Salem “witches.” Most
widely reported examples of mass psychogenic illness are in adults,
but there are several reports in children as well. In 2004, 10 teenage
females from a school in rural North Carolina developed paroxysmal
episodes resembling epilepsy or syncope. These females were from a
cohesive social group (school-­age students in a small school) and had
similar symptoms. The symptoms were shown not to be consistent
with either syncope or epilepsy, and they eventually resolved after a
two-­week holiday break from school. Another episode in Le Roy, New
York, was an outbreak of a “tic-­like” illness among high school students. The symptoms were atypical for tics because they were not preceded by a premonitory urge and could not be suppressed with effort.
In addition, the symptoms were remarkably similar across the affected
patients. Symptoms resolved over time. In the Le Roy example, there
was likely an exacerbating role of both social media and mass media,
which amplified the cohesiveness of the group. There has been a surge
of cases of “tic-­like” symptoms in adolescents during the COVID-­19
pandemic. It has been suggested that social media, especially videos
presented on the TikTok platform, has played an important role in the
spread of these symptoms.
In a study of 280 environmental chemical incidents in the United
Kingdom between 2007 and 2008, 7% were classified as mass psychogenic illness according to five diagnostic criteria: (1) presence of
somatic (bodily) symptoms, (2) preexisting social connection between

two or more of the affected people, (3) epidemic spread of symptoms,
(4) attribution of symptoms by affected individuals (or by their parents or caregivers) to a threatening external agent of a physical (usually
chemical, biologic, or radiologic) or spiritual nature, and (5) symptoms
and signs that are not compatible with the environmental exposure
specified by the affected individuals nor with any other environmental
exposure that could reasonably be expected to have been present at the
time of (or shortly before) the onset of symptoms.
One study has examined experimentally induced mass psychogenic
illness. In a randomized controlled experiment, participants were
assigned to one of three groups to study the effects of a simulated biologic threat and elements of social contagion. The three groups were
(1) no-­intervention control group, (2) psychogenic illness induction
group, and (3) psychogenic illness induction plus media group. Groups
2 and 3 were told that the purpose of the study was to test the side
effects of a carrier compound for an antiinfluenza medication. They
were told that the compound did not produce serious side effects but
was being evaluated with regard to mild side effects. In groups 2 and 3,
professional actors were placed among the participants to feign illness
during the study with symptoms of nausea, dizziness, and headache.
Group 3 was also shown a documentary about the 1918 flu pandemic.
The video contained interviews with survivors and vivid images of
death and illness. The two psychogenic induction groups had 11 times
more symptoms than did the control group. If a subject had a lifetime
history of a traumatic event or depression, he or she was more likely to
have symptoms. The documentary viewing was not associated with a
higher rate of symptoms. This study confirmed the role of “social contagion” in mass psychogenic illness and provided a model for future
studies of factors leading to such contagion.

TREATMENT STRATEGIES

Mass psychogenic illness is usually self-­limited, but treatment requires
careful reassurance and communication between physician and
patient. Explanation models should be communicated in a sensitive
manner so as not to appear dismissive of symptoms. When doctors
and patients do not agree on the “reality” of the illness, the prognosis is
worse. Thus media attention, medical and scientific disagreement, and
legal proceedings must be managed in a way that does not exacerbate
the symptoms or the illness.
In the Le Roy illness, treatment varied across individuals. The treatment strategies included cognitive-behavioral therapy, supportive psychotherapy, education, pharmacotherapy for coexisting anxiety, and
alteration of social setting. Many of the patients sought multiple medical opinions. There were frequent discussions among public health and
other medical officials and the local media outlets. Reduced media
attention seemed to lead to more rapid improvement of symptoms in
some patients.
It is helpful for healthcare providers to avoid the dichotomy of
approaching illness using a medical model in which diseases are considered as being either physically or psychologically based. In contrast,
a biobehavioral continuum of disease better characterizes illness as
occurring across a spectrum ranging from a predominantly biologic
etiology on one end to a predominantly psychosocial etiology on the
other. It is beneficial to the patient for the treating physician to try to
shift the emphasis from understanding the etiology to a path toward
recovery.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 765 u Animal and Human Bites

Chapter 765

Animal and Human Bites
David A. Hunstad
Many animals, besides domestic and stray dogs and cats, inflict bites on
humans. The profile of such bites varies by country and region, based
on community and living conditions, indigenous species, and opportunity for encounter.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Worldwide there are tens of millions of dog bites each year, resulting in nearly 60,000 deaths annually from rabies (see Chapter 320).
Dog bites represent approximately 80–90% of all bites in the United
States, while 5–15% are from cats, 2–5% from rodents, and the
remainder from rabbits, ferrets, farm animals, monkeys, and reptiles. An estimated 4.5 million persons in the United States are bitten by dogs annually; over 800,000 of those seek medical care. Bites
from dogs are also most common in Bangladesh, India, Pakistan,
and Myanmar, whereas in Nepal cattle and buffalo account for more
than half of bites, followed by dogs, pigs, and horses. Approximately
1% of dog bite wounds and 6% of cat bite wounds in the United
States require hospitalization. During the past three decades, there
have been several dozen deaths per year in the United States from
dog-­inflicted injuries; the majority of these occurred in children
under 11 years of age. Various studies have examined the incidence
of dog bite injuries by dog breed. Compared with other breeds, bites
by pit bull terriers and mixed-­breed dogs account for higher rates
of hospital admission, lower Glasgow Coma Scores at admission,
and an increased risk of death. Unaltered male dogs account for
approximately 75% of attacks, while nursing female dogs may inflict
injury when humans attempt to handle their puppies.
The majority of dog attacks on children in the United States occur
between the ages of 6 and 11 years, with a slight predominance in
males. Approximately 65% of attacks occur around the home, 75%
of biting animals are known by the children, and 50% of attacks are
said to be unprovoked. Similar statistics apply in Canada, where
70% of all bites reported in one study were sustained by children age
2-­14 years; 65% of dogs involved in biting were part of the family
or extended family.
Of the approximately 450,000 reported cat bites per year occurring
in the United States, nearly all are inflicted by known household animals. Because rodent bites (rat, mouse, gerbil) do not represent reportable conditions, little is known about the epidemiology of these injuries
or the incidence of infection after rodent-­inflicted bites or scratches.
Few data exist on the incidence and demographics of human bite
injuries in pediatric patients; however, preschool and early school-­
age children appear to be at greatest risk of sustaining an injury from
a human bite, often in daycare or preschool settings. In some series,
the proportion of human bites is highest among adolescents, an age
group in which fist-­to-­teeth injuries (so-­called “fight bites”) become
more common.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Dog bite–related injuries can be divided into three categories of
almost equal incidence: abrasions, puncture wounds, and lacerations with or without an associated avulsion of tissue. Bites from
larger dogs may also involve crush injury to tissues. In contrast, the
most common type of injury from cat bites is a puncture wound,
often penetrating deep into tissue or joint spaces. Human bite injuries are of two types: an occlusion injury that is incurred when the

4457

upper and lower teeth come together on a body part, or a clenched-­
fist injury that occurs when the injured fist, usually on the dominant hand, strikes the teeth of another individual.

DIAGNOSIS

Management of the bite victim should begin with a thorough history and physical examination. Careful attention should be paid
to the circumstances surrounding the bite event (e.g., species and
number of animals, type of animal [domestic or wild], whether
the attack was provoked or unprovoked, location of the attack), a
history of drug allergies, and the immunization status of the child
(tetanus) and animal (rabies). During physical examination, meticulous attention should be paid to the type, size, and depth of the
injury; the presence of any foreign material in the wound; the status of underlying structures; and, when the bite is on an extremity,
the exact location of the injury, an assessment of possibly involved
structures, and the range of motion of the affected area. Photographs of the injury should be recorded in the patient’s medical
record. Radiographs of the affected part should be considered if it
is likely that a bone or joint was penetrated or fractured or if foreign material is present in the wound. The possibility of a fracture
or penetrating injury of the skull should particularly be considered
in infants who have sustained dog bite injuries to the face or head.

COMPLICATIONS

Infection is the most common complication of bite injuries regardless of the species of biting animal. In most cases, culture specimens
from a fresh dog bite wound are not likely to be clinically useful.
Although potentially pathogenic bacteria have been isolated from
up to 80% of dog bite wounds that are brought to medical attention
within 8 hours of the bite, the infection rate for wounds receiving
medical attention in <8 hours is relatively low (2.5–20%). Cultures
should be obtained from the wound if there is clinical evidence of
infection or if the patient is immunocompromised. Capnocytophaga
canimorsus is isolated from approximately 5% of infected wounds in
immunocompromised patients (especially asplenia) and can cause
serious systemic infection in these individuals. In contrast to dogs,
the infection rate in cat bite wounds, even those that receive prompt
medical attention, is >50%; therefore cat bites should be closely
monitored for signs of infection.
The rate of infection after rodent bite injuries is not known. Most of
the oral flora of rats is similar to that of other mammals; however, up to
50% of rats, depending on worldwide geography, may harbor strains of
Streptobacillus moniliformis and Spirillum minus, both of which cause
rat bite fever (see Chapter 766).
All human bite wounds, regardless of the mechanism of injury,
should be considered high risk for infection. Current recommendations do not support obtaining cultures at the time of the bite as it does
not change empiric antibiotic therapy; however, any infected wounds
should be cultured.
Table 765.1 lists common causes of soft tissue bacterial infections after dog, cat, or other animal bites. Bites of humans or cats,
those in which treatment is delayed, those in immunocompromised
patients, and those associated with deep puncture wounds or significant crush injury carry a higher risk for infection. An elevated
risk for infection is also present if the bite is to certain anatomic
regions (e.g., hand, foot, or genitals) or there is penetration of bone
or tendons.

TREATMENT

Table 765.2 outlines the management of human or animal bite
wounds to reduce risk for infection. The wound should be anesthetized, cleaned, and irrigated with sterile saline using moderate
pressure. Irrigation with antibiotic-­containing solutions provides
no advantage over saline alone and may cause local irritation of
the tissues. Puncture wounds should be thoroughly cleansed and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4458 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
Table 765.1  Microorganisms Associated with Animal
Bites
DOG BITES
Staphylococcus species
Streptococcus species
Eikenella species
Pasteurella species
Proteus species
Klebsiella species
Haemophilus species
Enterobacter species
Capnocytophaga canimorsus
Bacteroides species
Moraxella species
Corynebacterium species
Neisseria species
Fusobacterium species
Prevotella species
Porphyromonas species
CAT BITES
Pasteurella species
Actinomyces species
Propionibacterium species
Bacteroides species
Fusobacterium species
Clostridium species
Wolinella species
Peptostreptococcus species
Staphylococcus species
Streptococcus species
HERBIVORE BITES
Actinobacillus lignieresii
Actinobacillus suis
Pasteurella multocida
Pasteurella caballi
SWINE BITES
Pasteurella aerogenes
Pasteurella multocida
Bacteroides species
Proteus species
Actinobacillus suis
Streptococcus species
Flavobacterium species
Mycoplasma species
RODENT BITES
Streptobacillus moniliformis
Spirillum minus (in Asia)
PRIMATE BITES
Bacteroides species
Fusobacterium species
Eikenella corrodens
Streptococcus species
Enterococcus species
Staphylococcus species
Enterobacterales
Herpes B virus
LARGE REPTILE (CROCODILE, ALLIGATOR) BITES
Aeromonas hydrophila
Pseudomonas pseudomallei (in Asia)
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Proteus species
Enterococcus species
Clostridium species
Adapted from Perkins Garth A, Harris NS, Spanierman CS. Animal bites in emergency
medicine. Available at: http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/768875-­overview,
updated October 7, 2021; accessed November 27, 2021. Reprinted with permission
from eMedicine.com.

Table 765.2  Initial Management of Bite Wounds
HISTORY
Animal bite: Ascertain the type of animal, whether the bite was
provoked or unprovoked, and the situation/environment in which
the bite occurred. Follow rabies guidelines (see Chapter 320) for
details on management of bites that carry a risk of rabies.
Patient: Obtain information on antimicrobial allergies, current
medications, splenectomy, liver disease, or immunosuppressive
conditions.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
If possible, photograph the wound and record its location, type,
and approximate depth; range of motion; possibility of joint
penetration; presence of edema or crush injury; nerve and tendon
function; and signs of infection.
CULTURE
Aerobic and anaerobic cultures should be taken from infected
wounds (not from fresh wounds).
IRRIGATION AND DEBRIDEMENT
Irrigate with water or sterile saline and debride devitalized or
necrotic tissue.
RADIOGRAPHS
Plain radiographs should be obtained if bony penetration is possible
or suspected; radiographs can also provide a baseline for future
evaluation of osteomyelitis.
WOUND CLOSURE
Primary wound closure is usually not advocated unless wounds
are extensive and closure is necessary for cosmetic or functional
reasons, especially large facial or neck wounds or those overlying
the joints. When possible, delayed primary closure or allowing the
wound to close by secondary intention is recommended.
ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY
Early presenting (uninfected) wounds: provide prophylactic
antimicrobials for (1) moderate-­to-­severe injuries, especially
if preexisting edema or significant crush injury is present; (2)
bone or joint space penetration; (3) deep hand wounds; (4)
immunocompromised patients; (5) wounds adjacent to prosthetic
material; and (6) wounds in close proximity to the genital area.
In most cases, coverage should include Pasteurella (Eikenella in
human bites), Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and anaerobes
including Fusobacterium, Porphyromonas, Prevotella, and
Bacteroides spp. See Table 765.3 for recommended antibiotics.
Infected wounds: See Table 765.3 for oral antibiotic
recommendations. In cases where intravenous antibiotics are
deemed necessary, antimicrobial choices include ampicillin/
sulbactam, piperacillin-­tazobactam, cefoxitin, or ertapenem.
HOSPITALIZATION
Indications include signs and symptoms of systemic toxicity and
worsening infection.
IMMUNIZATIONS
Provide tetanus and rabies immunization, if indicated.
ELEVATION
Elevation may be required if edema is present. Lack of elevation is a
common cause of therapeutic failure.
IMMOBILIZATION
For significant injuries, immobilize the extremity, especially the
hands, with a splint.
FOLLOW-­UP
Patients should be reminded to follow up within 48 hours or sooner
for worsening or unresolved infections and continued pain.
REPORTING
Reporting the incident to a local health department may be
required.
Adapted from Goldstein EJC, Abrahamian FM. Bites. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ,
eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, 9th
ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020: Table 315-­3.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 765 u Animal and Human Bites

4459

Table 765.3

Recommended Empirical Oral Antibiotics for Bite Wound Prophylaxis and Treatment

ANTIBIOTIC

RECOMMENDED ADULT DOSE

RECOMMENDED CHILD DOSE *

AGENT OF CHOICE
(A) Amoxicillin-clavulanate

875/125 mg twice daily

45 mg/kg per dose (amoxicillin component)
twice daily

ALTERNATE COMBINATION THERAPY: B OR C (WITH ANAEROBIC ACTIVITY) PLUS E, F, G, H, OR I
(B) Metronidazole

500 mg three times daily

10 mg/kg per dose three times daily

(C) Clindamycin

450 mg three times daily

10 mg/kg per dose three times daily

PLUS, ONE OF THE FOLLOWING:
(D) Doxycycline

100 mg twice daily

Not for use in children <8 yr old

(E) Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole

160/800 mg (1 DS tab) twice daily

4 to 5 mg/kg (trimethoprim component) per
dose* twice daily

(F) Penicillin V potassium

500 mg four times daily

12.5 mg/kg per dose four times daily

(G) Cefuroxime

500 mg twice daily

10 mg/kg per dose twice daily

(H) Moxifloxacin

400 mg once daily

Use with caution in children

Or:

*Child dose should not exceed recommended adult dose.
From Phillips LL, Semple J: Bites and injuries inflicted by wild and domestic animals. In Auerbach PS, Cushing TA, Harris NS (editors): Auerbach’s Wilderness Medicine, 7th ed, vol 1.
Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2017; Table 30.3, p. 623.

gently irrigated with a catheter or blunt-­tipped needle; blind, high-­
pressure irrigation should not be employed. Avulsed or devitalized tissue should be debrided and any fluctuant areas incised and
drained.
Surgical approaches to management of bite wounds may include
primary closure, delayed primary closure (i.e., in 3-­5 days), or healing by secondary intention. Factors to be considered are the type,
size, and depth of the wound; the anatomic location; the presence of
infection; the time since the injury; and the potential for cosmetic
disfigurement. Appropriate surgical consultation (e.g., general
pediatric surgery; plastic, hand, or orthopedic surgery) should be
obtained promptly for all patients with deep or extensive wounds;
wounds involving the hands, face, or bones and joints; and infected
wounds that require open drainage. Although there is general agreement that visibly infected wounds and those that are more than 24
hours old should not be sutured, there is a spectrum of practice
regarding the closing of wounds <8 hours old with no evidence of
infection. Because all bite wounds to the hand are at high risk for
infection, particularly if there has been disruption of the tendons
or penetration of the bones, surgical consultation is almost always
indicated, and delayed primary closure is recommended for many
bite wounds of the hands. Facial lacerations are at lower risk for
secondary infection because of the excellent blood supply to this
region. Given this fact and cosmetic considerations, many plastic
surgeons advocate primary closure of facial bite wounds that have
been brought to medical attention within 8 hours.
Similarly, there are few comparative trials addressing the efficacy and selection of antimicrobial agents for prophylaxis of bite
injuries. The bacteriology of bite wound infections is more often a
reflection of the oral flora of the biting animal than the skin flora
of the victim (see Table 765.1). Because many aerobic and anaerobic bacterial species colonizing the oral cavity of the biting animal
have the potential to invade local tissue, multiply, and cause tissue
destruction, most bite wound infections are polymicrobial.
Despite substantial homology in the oral bacterial flora of
humans, dogs, and cats, important differences exist among the biting species, reflected in the types of wound infections that occur.
The predominant bacterial species isolated from infected dog bite
wounds are Staphylococcus aureus (20–30%), Pasteurella multocida

(20–30%), Staphylococcus intermedius (25%), and C. canimorsus;
approximately one-­half of dog bite wound infections also contain
mixed anaerobes. Similar species are isolated from infected cat bite
wounds; however, P. multocida is the predominant species in at
least 50% of cat bite wound infections. At least 50% of rats harbor
S. moniliformis in the oropharynx, and approximately 25% in Asia
harbor S. minus, a small, uncultivatable gram-­negative organism.
In infected human bite wounds, nontypable strains of Haemophilus
influenzae, Eikenella corrodens, S. aureus, α-­hemolytic streptococci,
and β-­lactamase–producing aerobes (∼50%) are the predominant
species. Clenched-­fist injuries are particularly prone to infection by
Eikenella spp. (25%) and other anaerobes (50%).
The choice between oral and parenteral antimicrobial therapy
should be based on the severity of the wound, the presence and
degree of overt infection, signs of systemic toxicity, and the patient’s
immune status. Amoxicillin-­clavulanate is an excellent choice for
empiric oral therapy for human and animal bite wounds because
of its activity against most bacteria that are isolated from infected
bites (Table 765.3). Similarly, ampicillin-­sulbactam or piperacillin-­
tazobactam is preferred for patients who will receive empiric parenteral therapy. Penicillin G is the drug of choice for prophylaxis
and treatment of rat bite injuries, as this agent has excellent activity
against S. moniliformis and S. minus. Because first-­generation cephalosporins have limited activity against P. multocida and E. corrodens,
they should not be used for prophylaxis or empiric therapy of bite
wound infections. Therapeutic alternatives for bite wound infections in penicillin-­allergic patients are limited; clindamycin plus
trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole is the most commonly suggested
regimen for these patients. Tetracycline is the drug of choice for
penicillin-­allergic patients who have sustained rat bite injuries.
Although tetanus occurs only rarely after human or animal bite
injuries, it is important to obtain a detailed immunization history
and to provide tetanus toxoid to all patients who are incompletely
immunized or who received their most recent tetanus immunization more than five years prior. The need for postexposure rabies
vaccination in victims of dog and cat bites depends on whether the
biting animal is known to have been vaccinated and, most importantly, on local experience with rabid animals in the community.
Bites from bats, foxes, skunks, and raccoons should be considered

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4460 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
high risk for rabies, and postexposure prophylaxis is uniformly
indicated. For dogs, cats, and other animals that are known or captured, observation for 7-­10 days by the local animal control department is indicated, and rabies prophylaxis can be delayed as long as
the animal remains asymptomatic. If a biting dog or cat has escaped,
a decision about rabies prophylaxis can be based on the circumstances surrounding the bite and advice from local infectious disease specialists and/or health department officials. Worldwide,
animal bites and contacts result annually in more than 10 million
courses of rabies postexposure prophylaxis.
In human bites where the biter’s blood may have contaminated the
wound, risk for hepatitis B, hepatitis C, and HIV infections should be
considered (see Chapters 322 and 406).

PREVENTION

It is possible to reduce the risk of animal bite injury with anticipatory guidance. Parents should be routinely counseled during prenatal visits and routine health maintenance examinations about the
risks of having potentially biting pets in the household. All patients
should be cautioned against harboring exotic animals as pets. All
young children should be closely supervised, particularly when in
the presence of animals, and from a very early age should be taught
to respect animals and to be aware of their potential to inflict injury.
Reduction of the rate of human bite injuries, particularly in daycare
centers and schools, can be achieved by good surveillance of the
children and adequate teacher-­to-­child ratios.

A

B

Fig. 766.1 Morbilliform rash on the hands/palms (A) and feet (B) of a
patient with rat bite fever. (From Vetter NM, Feder HM Jr, Ratzan RM.
Rat bite fever caused by a kiss. Am J Emer Med. 2015;34:1190.e3–
1190.e4. Figs. 1 and 3.)

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 766

Rat Bite Fever
David A. Hunstad
Fig. 766.2 Hemorrhagic vesicles on the first and third toes of a pa-

ETIOLOGY

Rat bite fever is a generic term that has been applied to at least two
distinct clinical syndromes, each caused by a different microbial agent.
Rat bite fever caused by Streptobacillus moniliformis is most commonly
reported in the United States as well as in Brazil, Canada, Mexico,
Paraguay, Great Britain, and France; it has been identified elsewhere
in Europe and in Australia. S. moniliformis is a gram-­negative bacillus
that is present in the nasopharyngeal flora of many laboratory and wild
rats. Infection with S. moniliformis most commonly occurs following
the bite of a rat; however, infection has also been reported in individuals who have been scratched by rats, in those who have handled dead
rats, and in those who have ingested milk contaminated with the bacterium (termed Haverhill fever). Rat bite fever may also be transmitted
by bites from wild mice. Rat bite fever caused by Spirillum minus, called
sodoku (after the Japanese for “rat” and “poison”), is most commonly
reported in Asia. S. minus is a small, spiral, aerobic gram-­negative
organism. Reports of rat bite fever from Africa are rare, suggesting
under recognition rather than absence of the disease.

CLINICAL COURSE

The incubation period for the streptobacillary form of rat bite fever
is variable, ranging from 3-­10 days. The illness is characterized by an
abrupt onset of fever up to 41°C (105.8°F) in over 90% of reported cases,
as well as severe throbbing headache, intense myalgias, chills, and vomiting. In virtually all instances, the lesion at the cutaneous inoculation

tient with advanced rat bite fever. (From Elliott SP. Rat bite fever and
Streptobacillus moniliformis. Clin Microbiol Rev. 22007;20:13–22. Fig.
3.)

site has healed by the time that systemic systems first appear. Shortly
after the onset of the fever, a polymorphous rash occurs in up to 75%
of patients. In most patients, the rash consists of blotchy red maculopapular lesions that often have a petechial component; the distribution
of the rash is variable, but it is typically most dense on the extremities
(Fig. 766.1). Hemorrhagic vesicles may develop on the hands and feet
and are very tender to palpation (Fig. 766.2).
Approximately 50% of patients have arthritis, which first manifests
toward the end of the first week of disease; early on, the arthritis may
be migratory. If untreated, fever, rash, and arthritis last from 14-­21
days, often with a biphasic pattern to the fever and arthritis. A wide
range of complications are reported in patients with rat bite fever,
the most common being pneumonia, persistent arthritis, brain and
soft tissue abscesses, and, less commonly, myocarditis or endocarditis. The mortality rate in untreated rat bite fever is estimated to be
10–15%.
The incubation period of sodoku is longer (14-­21 days) than that of
the streptobacillary form of disease. The hallmark of Spirillum-­induced
disease is fever associated with an indurated, often suppurative, nonhealing lesion at the bite site. Lymphadenitis and lymphadenopathy are
invariably present in the regional nodes that drain the inoculation site,
and many patients have a generalized macular rash most prominent

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 767 u Mpox (Monkeypox)
when fever is present. In untreated patients, sodoku has a relapsing and
remitting course; symptoms abate after 5-­7 days of chills and fever but
recur 7-­10 days later. There may be multiple cycles if the disease is not
recognized and treated.

DIAGNOSIS

Diagnosis of the streptobacillary form of rat bite fever is difficult
because the disease is uncommon and can be confused with Rocky
Mountain spotted fever or (less commonly) meningococcemia. Furthermore, S. moniliformis is difficult both to isolate and to identify
with classic bacteriologic techniques. The organism is fastidious and
is inhibited by sodium polyanethol sulfonate, an additive present in
many commercial blood culture bottles. Therefore the clinical microbiology laboratory should be notified when this infection is suspected so
that additional media can be inoculated. A definitive diagnosis is made
when S. moniliformis is recovered from blood or joint fluid or is identified in human samples by polymerase chain reaction (PCR), which has
been used successfully in humans.
Diagnosis of sodoku is made on clinical grounds because there are no
diagnostic serologic tests and culture of S. minus has not been achieved
in laboratory media. Rarely, the organism may be visualized in Gram-­
stained smears of pus from the inoculation site. Approximately 50% of
patients exhibit a false-­positive Venereal Disease Research Laboratory
(VDRL) test.

TREATMENT

Penicillin is the drug of choice for both forms of rat bite fever. Intravenous penicillin G or intramuscular penicillin G procaine is recommended for 7-­10 days; a regimen of IV penicillin G for 5-­7 days
followed by oral penicillin V for an additional 7 days has also been
used. Doxycycline, gentamicin, or streptomycin represent effective
alternatives for penicillin-­allergic patients. Patients with endocarditis
caused by S. moniliformis require high-­dose penicillin G for 4 weeks;
the addition of streptomycin or gentamicin might be helpful.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

4461

bite or by human contact with an infected animal’s blood, wound
discharge, or other body fluids. Human-­to-­human transmission was
previously thought to be uncommon, but a global outbreak in 2022
was linked to a shift to human-­to-­human transmission.
As of early 2023, nearly 87,000 cases were documented globally.
Although children have comprised up to 40% of cases in previous outbreaks, the epidemiology of the current outbreak is different; less than 700
cases (<2%) have been reported in children and adolescents ≤20 years old.
Mpox is currently spread predominantly through close human-­to-­human
contact. The most recent outbreak has affected mostly gay, bisexual, and
other men who have sex with men. Patients living with advanced HIV
(with low CD4 counts) are at increased risk for severe disease. Although
children typically acquire mpox from household contact, sexual contact is
the primary route of transmission for adolescents. Mpox virus can persist
on surfaces in households with an affected person.

CLINICAL COURSE

The classic clinical signs, symptoms, and course of mpox are similar to those of smallpox, although typically milder. After an incubation period of 10-­14 days, during which the mpox virus replicates
in lymphoid tissues, humans experience an abrupt onset of malaise,
fever, myalgia, headache, and severe backache. Nonproductive cough,
nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain may be present. Generalized
lymphadenopathy, a finding unusual in smallpox, is invariably present
during the acute stages of mpox illness. After a prodrome of 2-­4 days,
an exanthem appears on the face and progresses inferiorly, including
the palms and soles. As the rash spreads, fevers begin to abate. The rash
is initially macular but transforms within hours to firm papules that
rapidly vesiculate and become pustular over 2-­3 days (Table 767.1).
Unlike smallpox lesions but similar to chickenpox lesions, the lesions
of mpox tend to occur in crops (Fig. 767.1). Late into the second week
of illness, the lesions begin to desiccate, crust, scab, and fall off. During the 2022 global outbreak, lesions often occurred in the genital and
anorectal areas and in the mouth (Fig. 767.2); cutaneous lesions are
Table 767.1  Mpox: Lesion Progression Through the Scab
Stage
STAGE

STAGE DURATION
(DAYS)*

CHARACTERISTICS

Chapter 767

Enanthem

Sometimes, lesions first form on
the tongue and in the mouth.

Mpox (Monkeypox)

Macules

1-­2

Macular lesions appear.

Papules

1-­2

Lesions typically progress
from macular (flat) to papular
(raised).

Vesicles

1-­2

Lesions then typically become
vesicular (raised and filled with
clear fluid).

Pustules

5-­7

Lesions then typically become
pustular (filled with opaque
fluid) – sharply raised, usually
round, and firm to the touch
(deep seated).
Finally, lesions typically develop
a depression in the center
(umbilication).
The pustules will remain for
approximately 5-­7 days before
beginning to crust.

Scabs

7-­14

By the end of the second week,
pustules have crusted and
scabbed over.
Scabs will remain for about a
week before beginning to fall
off.

David A. Hunstad
Since the eradication of smallpox (variola), mpox (formerly known as
monkeypox) virus has, for humans, become the most important member
of the genus Orthopoxvirus. Monkeys are the predominant host for the
virus; however, it may be endemic in African rainforest squirrels and is
present in African rats, mice, domestic pigs, hedgehogs, and opossums.
It has also been identified in and transmitted by imported prairie dogs in
the United States and has affected elephants in zoos. Severity of infection
varies by viral strain and by host; for example, disease is relatively mild in
cynomolgus monkeys but severe in orangutans.
Mpox was first observed in humans from West and Central Africa
in the 1970s at the time that smallpox had been eradicated from the
area. In the 1970s, the secondary attack rate was around 3% (a stark
comparison to the 80% seen in unvaccinated smallpox contacts).
Few cases were observed over the next 2 decades; however, during
a subsequent outbreak in the 1990s, when immunity to smallpox
was no longer prevalent in the population, the secondary attack rate
exceeded 75%. Mpox was introduced into the United States in 2003,
presumably through rodents from Ghana that infected prairie dogs
that were subsequently distributed as pets. Before 2022, primary
transmission of the disease was from infected animal to human by

*This is a typical timeline, but timelines can vary.
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Key Characteristics for identifying
Mpox. https://www.cdc.gov/poxvirus/mpox/clinicians/clinical-­recognition.html

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A

B

Fig. 767.1 A, Legs and feet of an mpox (endemic) patient. B, Legs and feet of a smallpox patient at an analogous stage of rash (pustular). (A,
Courtesy Joseph M. Harvey, MD. B, Courtesy J. Nobel, Jr., MD, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

I

Fig. 767.2 Clinical presentation of mpox. A, Pustules in the genital and pubic region, in which the initial umbilication has progressed to necrotic crust

with central depression. B, Three semiconfluent pustular lesions with a depressed center located on the left side of the tongue dorsum. C, Pearly acral
vesicles embedded in the thick stratum corneum of the palmar skin, shotty on palpation. D, Scattered papules, pustules, and umbilicated pustules
surrounded by an erythematous halo on the lateral aspect of the chest and left arm. E, Pustules circumferentially distributed on the anal margin and
perianal skin. F, A pustular lesion with a crusted center on the semimucosa of the lower lip, close to the right oral commissure. G, Primary inoculation
site with a large, crusted lesion on the right cheek. H, The right palatine tonsil is reddened and enlarged and has a fibrin-­covered ulcer. I, The penile
glans and foreskin have lesions of varying sizes and stages of evolution, with edema surrounding the larger ulcer. (From Tarín-­Vicente EJ, Alemany A,
Agud-­Dios M, et al. Clinical presentation and virological assessment of confirmed human monkeypox virus cases in Spain: a prospective observational
cohort study. Lancet. 2022;400[10353]:661–669. Fig. 1; Photos A–C, E–G, I taken by Eloy José Tarín-Vicente, MD; Photos D, H by Maria Ubals, MD.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 767 u Mpox (Monkeypox)

4463

A

Peripheral
keratitis

Conjunctival
ulcer

B
Fig. 767.3 Left eye in a patient with HIV-­associated immunocompromise and ocular mpox, with conjunctivitis and conjunctival lesion earlier in the

course of mpox illness (A), and with conjunctival ulcer and peripheral keratitis later in the course of mpox illness (B) — United States, August–September 2022. (A courtesy Nathanael Adjei-­Kyeremeh. B courtesy Dharmendra R. Patel; From Cash-­Goldwasser S, Labuda SM, McCormick DW, et al.
Ocular monkeypox – United States, July–September 2020. MMWR. 2022;71:1343–1347. Fig. 2.)

less often disseminated with occasionally only a single lesion noted.
Additionally, fever and other systemic symptoms may occur before the
rash, after the rash, or not at all. Disseminated systemic or focal disease
may include encephalitis, pharyngitis, myocarditis, arthritis, proctitis,
lymphadenopathy, pneumonia, and ocular involvement (Fig. 767.3).
Mpox should be suspected in any child or adolescent who has the
characteristic prodrome associated with a poxlike eruption and a
history of close contact with someone who has been diagnosed with
mpox, residence in Africa, or contact with prairie dogs or exotic
mammals such as Gambian rats and rope squirrels. Diagnosis is by
isolation of mpox viral DNA by polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
from a skin lesion, including exudate or lesion crust. Oropharyngeal
swabs may be considered in high-­risk contacts of known or probable cases who have not yet developed a rash that can be swabbed
(Table 767.2).
Cowpox, another Orthopoxvirus, often acquired from a pet rat, may
produce similar cutaneous lesions. Regional lymphadenopathy and
mild system features may also be present. Diagnosis is confirmed by a
specific cowpox virus PCR.

PREVENTION AND TREATMENT

In 2019, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved
a new live-­
attenuated, replication-­
deficient vaccinia virus vaccine (branded Jynneos in the United States and Imvamune in the

European Union [EU]; Bavarian Nordic) for use in patients ≥18
years old who are at risk for mpox acquisition. Despite evidence
that preexposure administration of classical smallpox vaccine is
85% effective in preventing or attenuating mpox disease, the rarity
of mpox infection does not warrant universal vaccination. However,
following the recent 2022 outbreak, the U.S. Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention recommends vaccinating high-­risk patients
(Table 767.3). This vaccine has a very low side effect profile and
can be safely used in immunocompromised individuals, a significant advantage over classical (replication-­competent) live smallpox
vaccines.
For most immunocompetent patients with mild to moderate disease, supportive care is recommended. However, treatment should
be considered for those with severe disease (hemorrhagic disease,
large number of confluent lesions, necrotic lesions, severe lymphadenopathy that is necrotic or obstructing, involvement of multiple
organ systems and comorbidities, or those who require hospitalization) or those with involvement of anatomic areas where scarring
or stricture might cause serious sequelae (Fig. 767.4). In addition,
treatment may be considered in patients at high risk for severe disease, including children less than 1 year old, immunocompromised
or pregnant patients, or those with reduced skin integrity (e.g.,
eczema). Treatment options include tecovirimat, brincidofovir,
cidofovir, or trifluridine ophthalmic solution; these medications
were originally developed for treatment of other viral infections and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4464 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
Table 767.2  Mpox Case Definitions
CLINICAL AND
LABORATORY
CLASSIFICATION

CRITERIA

Suspected

New characteristic rash* OR
Meets one of the epidemiologic criteria and has high clinical suspicion† for mpox

Probable

No suspicion of other recent Orthopoxvirus exposure (e.g., vaccinia virus in ACAM2000 vaccination) AND demonstration of
the presence of
• Orthopoxvirus DNA by polymerase chain reaction testing of a clinical specimen OR
• Orthopoxvirus using immunohistochemical or electron microscopy testing methods OR
• Demonstration of detectable levels of anti-­Orthopoxvirus IgM antibody during the period of 4-­56 days after rash onset

Confirmed

Demonstration of the presence of mpox virus DNA by polymerase chain reaction testing or next-­generation sequencing of a
clinical specimen OR
Isolation of mpox virus in culture from a clinical specimen

EPIDEMIOLOGIC CLASSIFICATION
Within 21 days of
Reports having contact with a person or persons with a similar appearing rash or with a person who has received a
illness onset:
diagnosis of confirmed or probable mpox OR
Had close or intimate in-­person contact with persons in a social network experiencing mpox infections. This includes MSM
who meet partners through an online website, digital application (“app”), or social event (e.g., a bar or party) OR
Traveled, within 21 days of illness onset outside the United States to a country with confirmed cases of mpox or where mpox
virus is endemic OR
Had contact with a dead or live wild animal or exotic pet that is an African endemic species, or used a product derived from such
animals (e.g., game meat, creams, lotions, powders, etc.)
EXCLUSIONS
A case might be
excluded as
a suspected,
probable or
confirmed case if:

An alternative diagnosis* can fully explain the illness OR
A person with symptoms consistent with mpox does not develop a rash within 5 days of illness onset OR
A case where high-­quality specimens do not demonstrate the presence of Orthopoxvirus or mpox virus or antibodies to
Orthopoxvirus

*The characteristic rash associated with mpox lesions involves the following: deep-­seated and well-­circumscribed lesions, often with central umbilication; and lesion progression
through specific sequential stages: macules, papules, vesicles, pustules, and scabs. The rash can sometimes be confused with other diseases that are more commonly encountered
in clinical practice (e.g., syphilis, herpes, and varicella-­zoster). Historically, sporadic accounts of patients co-infected with mpox virus and other infectious agents (e.g., varicella-­
zoster, syphilis) have been reported; so patients with a characteristic rash should be considered for Mpox virus testing, even if tests for other infectious agents are positive.
†Clinical suspicion may exist if lesions consistent with those from more common infections (e.g., syphilis, herpes, and varicella-­zoster) coexist with lesions that may be characteristic of
mpox.
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Updated case-­finding guidance: Mpox outbreak – United States, 2022. https://emergency.cdc.gov/han/2022/han00468.asp#:∼text

Table 767.3  Mpox Vaccination Basics
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends vaccination
against mpox if:
• You had known or suspected exposure to someone with mpox
• You had a sex partner in the past 2 weeks who was diagnosed
with mpox
• You are a gay, bisexual, or other man who has sex with men or a
transgender, nonbinary, or gender-­diverse person who in the past
6 months has had any of the following:
• A new diagnosis of one or more sexually transmitted diseases
(e.g., chlamydia, gonorrhea, or syphilis)
• More than one sex partner
• You have had any of the following in the past 6 months:
• Sex at a commercial sex venue (like a sex club or bathhouse)
• Sex related to a large commercial event or in a geographic area
(city or county for example) where mpox virus transmission is
occurring
• Sex in exchange for money or other items
• You have a sex partner with any of the above risks
• You anticipate experiencing any of the above scenarios
• You have HIV or other causes of immune suppression and have
had recent or anticipate future risk of mpox exposure from any of
the above scenarios
• You work in settings where you may be exposed to mpox:
• You work with orthopoxviruses in a laboratory
• You are part of an Orthopoxvirus and healthcare worker
response team

are thought to complement the immune response by reducing replication, maturation, and spread of mpox. Vaccinia immune globulin
intravenous (VIGIV) may be considered in immunocompromised
patients who cannot mount an appropriate immune response to
clear the virus. In addition to antiviral medications, careful attention should be paid to skin hygiene, maintenance of adequate
nutrition and hydration, and prompt implementation of local or
systemic therapy for secondary bacterial infection that may occur.
Pain management is a common reason for hospitalization because
both cutaneous and mucosal lesions can be very painful. For prevention of human-­to-­human spread of disease, a combination of
contact, droplet, and airborne infection control procedures should
be implemented.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Mpox Vaccination Basics. https://www.
cdc.gov/poxvirus/mpox/vaccines/index.html

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 767 u Mpox (Monkeypox)
Suspected, probable, or
confirmed mpox case

HIV-positive
OR
Other immunocompromising
condition
OR
On immunosuppressive
medications

Yes

Optimize immune function (e.g.,
defer chemo-/immunotherapy,
ensure effective ARV)

No
• Standard supportive therapies
including pain control
• Potential enrollment in available
clinical trials involving MCMs

No

Severe disease or at risk for
severe disease
Yes
Concern for altered oral drug
absorption, inability of a
patient to reliably take oral
therapy, or diffuse and
disseminated infection
No

Oral
tecovirimat

Yes
Might change as clinical
status changes

Intravenous
tecovirimat

Yes
Severe immunocompromise

+/- Brincidofovir or cidofovir
+/- VIGIV

No

Ocular lesions or at risk for
ocular lesions

Yes

Refer to management
of ocular infections

+/- Topical trifluridine

No
Complications involving other
specific organ systems (e.g.,
neurologic, cardiac
[myopericarditis], mucosal,
dermatologic) or disseminated
infection and uncontrolled viral
spread from severe
immunocompromise

Yes

Refer to management
of severe mpox cases and
other clinical considerations

No
Worsening clinical illness (e.g.,
new hemodynamic instability,
organ dysfunction, or eruption of
new lesions in multiple locations)
despite initial treatment

Yes

If not previously given or additional doses needed:
+/- Brincidofovir or cidofovir
+/- VIGIV
+/- Intravenous tecovirimat

No
At 14 days of antivirals, reassess
clinical status, and
discontinue if clinical improvement
and no new lesion formation

No

Formation of new lesions
≥7 days after antiviral initiation

Yes

+/- Orthopoxvirus PCR testing of new lesions
+/- Testing for other etiologies (e.g., bacterial
superinfection)
+/- Serology to evaluate IgM immune response
+/- Tecovirimat pharmacokinetic testing
+/- Tecovirimat resistance testing

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4465

4466 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
Fig. 767.4 Algorithmic approach to treatment*,†,‡ of patients with severe§ or at risk¶ for severe manifestations of mpox** : United States, February

2023.††
* Treatment includes MCMs (i.e., tecovirimat, brincidofovir, cidofovir, VIGIV, and trifluridine) and supportive therapies, including pain management.
https://www.cdc.gov/poxvirus/monkeypox/clinicians/pain-­management.html
† Most immunocompetent patients should display signs of clinical improvement within 4 days of antiviral initiation (i.e., tecovirimat, brincidofovir,
cidofovir, and trifluridine). Tecovirimat is expected to reach steady-­state concentrations by day 6 of dosing in healthy volunteers; therefore worsening
clinical illness after 7 days of treatment in patients with severe illness could prompt additional evaluations.
‡ Concern for altered drug absorption includes the inability to tolerate or take oral therapy (e.g., nothing by mouth), or possibility that the oral drug
absorption might be altered because of inability to consume a high-­fat meal, severity of symptoms (e.g., systemic illness), comorbidities (e.g., history
of gastric bypass or underlying GI disease), or other factors that might alter oral drug absorption.
§ Hemorrhagic disease, a large number of confluent or necrotic lesions, severe lymphadenopathy that is necrotizing or obstructing (e.g., of the upper airway causing airway compromise or of the GI tract necessitating parenteral feeding), edema that is obstructing (e.g., of the lower GI tract),
extradermatologic manifestations (e.g., pulmonary nodules, encephalitis, myopericarditis, or ocular infections), and sepsis. Detailed characteristics
of severe disease are available at https://www.cdc.gov/poxvirus/monkeypox/clinicians/treatment.html#anchor_1655488137245.
¶ Persons with underlying medical conditions (e.g., severe or moderate immunocompromise [https://www.cdc.gov/poxvirus/monkeypox/clinicians/
people-­with-­HIV.html]); bacterial superinfections; or complications, including strictures, edema, and infections of the penile foreskin, vulva, urethral
meatus, or anorectum, which could require procedural intervention (e.g., urethral catheterization, colostomy, or surgical debridement). This also includes those with or at risk for ocular lesions (i.e., presence of eyelid lesions, facial lesions near the eyes, or finger or hand lesions in patients unable
to avoid touching their eyes [for whom autoinoculation is a concern]). Detailed characteristics of persons at risk for severe disease are available at ht
tps://www.cdc.gov/poxvirus/monkeypox/clinicians/treatment.html#anchor_1655488137245.
** https://www.cdc.gov/poxvirus/monkeypox/clinicians/case-­definition.html
†† This figure is a comprehensive synthesis of heterogeneous evidence and is intended to foster strategic decision-­making rather than serve as a
prescriptive treatment guideline.
ARV, Antiretroviral medications; GI, gastrointestinal; IgM, immunoglobulin M; MCM, medical countermeasure; PCR, polymerase chain reaction;
VIGIV, vaccinia immune globulin intravenous. (From Rao AK, Schrodt CA, Minhaj FS, et al. Interim clinical treatment considerations of severe manifestations of Mpox – United States, February 2023. MMWR. 2023;72:232–243.)

Chapter 768

Envenomations
Sing-­Yi Feng
Envenomations due to snakes, spiders, scorpions, and other venomous animals can cause significant morbidity and mortality, although
the majority cause only localized pain and swelling. In the 2020 report
of the American Association of Poison Control Centers, approximately
42,800 out of 2.1 million phone consultations were related to bites and
stings of various creatures, with approximately 14,000 involving children <20 years of age.
Not every bite from a venomous creature is harmful. In many cases,
no venom is injected; these are called dry bites. A dry bite may occur
for many reasons, including failure of the venom delivery mechanism
and depletion of venom. Up to 20% of pit viper, 80% of coral snake, and
approximately 50% of all venomous snake bites are dry.

GENERAL APPROACH TO THE ENVENOMATED
CHILD

Children may be bitten or stung as they play and explore their environment. The evaluation may be hampered by an unclear history of the
circumstances and the possible offending organism, particularly with
preverbal children. The overall effects of some venomous bites and
stings may be relatively more severe in children than in adults because
children generally receive a similar venom load from the offending animal yet have less circulating blood volume to dilute its effects.

General Management

The majority of envenomations require local wound care, pain control,
and reassurance. However, the severely envenomated child may require
advanced life support interventions including endotracheal intubation
and mechanical ventilation. Intravenous access should be obtained in
an unaffected extremity if possible (see Chapters 91 and 92) to provide fluids and vasopressors as needed. Early hypotension is usually
due to vasodilation and should be treated with volume expansion using

appropriate infusion of intravenous crystalloid solution (normal saline
boluses of 20 mL/kg; repeated as needed up to three times). Shock
unresponsive to volume repletion may require addition of a vasopressive agent such as epinephrine or norepinephrine (in addition to antivenom administration if appropriate). If the presentation is suspicious
for an anaphylactic reaction to venom, treatment (including epinephrine) should be initiated as soon as possible (see Chapter 190) along
with the appropriate antivenom.
The affected body part should be immobilized in a position of function and any areas of edema should be marked, measured, and monitored. If antivenom is available for the envenomation, efforts should be
initiated to locate and secure an adequate amount to treat the patient.
In the United States, regional poison control centers are available via
the national phone number 1-­800-­222-­1222 to facilitate this effort,
especially if the species is exotic. Guidance in dosing the antivenom
should be obtained from experienced toxicologists via the regional poison center.

General Wound Care

Bites and stings require basic wound care, including copious tap water
or normal saline irrigation under pressure when possible. For small
puncture wounds, this is impractical, but the skin should still be thoroughly cleansed with soap and water. Tetanus immunization should
be updated as needed. Intact bullae should be left to act as a natural
sterile dressing to prevent infection, whereas ruptured bullae should
be debrided. Exposed tissue should be covered with wet to dry dressings. Necrotic wounds, as seen in some snake and spider bites, should
be judiciously debrided, with removal of only clearly necrotic tissue.
Reconstructive surgery with skin grafts or muscle/tendon grafts may
be necessary later. Prophylactic antibiotics are usually not necessary because venom is bacteriostatic. Antibiotics should generally be
reserved for signs of established secondary infection.

SNAKE BITES

Most snake bites are inflicted by nonvenomous species and are of no more
consequence than a potentially contaminated puncture wound. Anatomic
features including head shape, pupil shape, and anal plate arrangement can
be used to differentiate venomous and nonvenomous snakes (Fig. 768.1).
Medically important venomous snakes in the United States belong to two
families: Crotalinae and Elapidae (Table 768.1). Most snakebites occur

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 768 u Envenomations 4467
Venomous
Pit vipers

Nonvenomous
Rat snakes, etc.

Corals

Triangular head

Round head
Ovate shaped head

Keeled scales

Elliptical pupil
Nostril

Pit
Northern Pacific Rattlesnake
(Crotalus viridis oreganus)
Anal plate
Rattlesnakes
Rattles
Copperheads and
Cottonmouths
No rattles

Eastern Coral Snake
(Micrurus fulvius)

Nostril
Split anal plate

Double row of subcaudal scales
Single row of subcaudal scales

Round pupil
Nostril
Trans-Pecos Rat Snake
(Bogertophis subocularis)

Double row of subcaudal scales

Split anal plate

Anal plate

Fig. 768.1 Anatomic comparison of pit vipers, coral snakes, and nonvenomous snakes of the United States. (Modified from Adams JG, ed. Emergency Medicine. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2008. Drawing by Marlin Sawyer.)

Table 768.1  Important Venomous Snake Families in the United States
FAMILY

EXAMPLES

TOXIN EFFECTS/OTHER COMMENTS

ANTIVENOM

Crotalinae (pit
vipers)

Rattlesnakes (Crotalus and
Sistrurus spp.), cottonmouths and
copperheads (Agkistrodon spp.)

Heat-­sensing “pit” between each eye and
nostril
Toxins cause tissue damage, coagulopathy,
cardiovascular collapse
Exception: Mojave rattlesnake (Crotalus
scutulatus) – neurotoxic venom

Crotalinae polyvalent immune Fab

Elapidae

Coral snakes (Micrurus spp.)

Venom is neurotoxic

Antivenin (Micrurus fulvius)

from April through September, when snakes are at their most active. Males
sustain 75% of bites and children <5 years of age account for 10–15%. Bites
are usually located on extremities, although other parts of the body have
been reported. In the United States, approximately 98% of venomous
snake bites are inflicted by pit vipers (Crotalinae). A small fraction of bites
are caused by coral snakes (Elapidae) in the southern and southwestern
states and by exotic pet snakes that have been imported.

Venoms and Effects

Snake venoms are complex mixtures of proteins including enzymes that
cause local tissue destruction and other enzymes that have potentially
lethal systemic effects including coagulopathy and neurotoxicity. The
symptoms and severity of an envenomation vary according to the type of
snake, the amount of venom injected, and the location of the bite. About
25% of snakebites are “dry bites,” where the patient has fang marks and
puncture wounds but no pain, swelling, or systemic effects as no venom
was injected. Most pit viper bites cause significant local pain, swelling,
and ecchymosis and may result in necrosis of the affected extremity
(Fig. 768.2). Pain and swelling typically begin quickly after the bite and
may progress over hours to days. Serious envenomation may result in

a consumptive coagulopathy, hypotension, and respiratory distress. In
contrast, venom from the Elapidae is neurotoxic with little or no local
tissue damage. These bites cause variable local pain, and the onset of
systemic effects can be delayed for hours. Manifestations of neurotoxicity generally are caused by curare-­like blockade at the neuromuscular junction. Symptoms usually begin with cranial nerve palsies such as
ptosis, dysarthria, and dysphagia and may progress to respiratory failure
and complete paralysis. Some pit vipers, including the Southern Pacific
rattlesnake (Crotalus oreganus helleri), western diamondback rattlesnake
(Crotalus atrox), timber rattlesnake (Crotalus horridus), and Mojave
rattlesnake (Crotalus scutulatus), can also cause significant neurotoxicity, like the Elapidae. Regional poison control centers and toxicologists
should be consulted early in the course of treatment.

Management

Prehospital care should focus on rapid transport to the emergency
department while providing supportive care. Constrictive clothing, jewelry, and watches should be removed, and the injured body
part should be immobilized in a position of function at the level of
the heart. Many popularized field treatments for snake bites, such as

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4468 Part XXXII u Environmental Health

Fig. 768.2 Southern Pacific rattlesnake bite (Crotalus oreganus hel-

leri) in a 2-­yr-­old child. Note the fang marks, swelling, and bruising of
the tissues (photograph taken 2 hours following the bite). (Courtesy
Sean Bush, MD.)

tourniquets, ice, electric shock, incision, and suction, have proven ineffective or deleterious.
At the hospital, supportive care should be continued as an effort is
made to identify the offending snake and secure the appropriate antivenom (if applicable). In severe envenomations, advanced respiratory support may be required, including endotracheal intubation and
mechanical ventilation. Intravenous access should be established in
an unaffected extremity, intravenous fluids administered as needed,
and standard laboratory specimens obtained, including complete
blood count, coagulation studies, fibrinogen concentration, and serum
chemistry analysis including total creatine kinase. Laboratory studies
should initially be repeated every 4-­6 hours to monitor the patient’s
progress and response to therapy. If tourniquets are placed in the field,
they should be cautiously removed after venous access is obtained due
to possible adverse effects that may follow from a sudden release of
venom into the systemic circulation. The bitten extremity should be
marked with the leading edge of the erythema and edema as well as the
time to monitor progression of the swelling.
Assessment of the severity of the envenomation in the field and at the
hospital is essential in determining the appropriateness of antivenom
therapy for the snakebite victim (Table 768.2). Antivenoms are relatively specific for the genus of snake whose venom they are designed
to neutralize. If it is determined that the patient requires antivenom,
appropriating the correct antivenom should begin as soon as possible
by discussing the matter with the hospital pharmacy, regional poison
control center, and perhaps local zoos and museums that keep captive
snakes because they often stock exotic snake antivenom.
Table 768.3 lists the indications for administering antivenom. CroFab, a Crotalinae polyvalent immune Fab antivenom (FabAV), is
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in
crotalid envenomations. FabAV is derived from sheep (ovine) antibodies to crotalid snake venom, and side effects include both immediate
and delayed hypersensitivity reactions. FabAV is derived from four
snakes, three from the genus Crotalus (the eastern diamondback rattlesnake, the western diamondback rattlesnake, and the Mojave rattlesnake) and one from the genus Agkistrodon (the cottonmouth or water
moccasin). It is effective against the venoms of all Crotalinae snakes in
the United States. There is cross reactivity with FabAV against venom
from copperhead snakes (Agkistrodon contortrix). However, copperhead bites often do not require treatment with antivenom because they
cause fewer systemic effects and less severe local tissue damage. Most
copperhead envenomations cause only local tissue swelling, ecchymosis, and pain and generally do well with good supportive care and pain
control. Any child with evidence of systemic toxicity should receive
FabAV.

Initial dosing of FabAV is aimed at control of symptoms (progressive tissue swelling, thrombocytopenia, coagulopathy, neurotoxicity, or systemic toxicity). The dose is repeated until initial control
of toxicity is achieved (see Table 768.3). Subsequent maintenance
dosing may be needed to prevent or treat recurrence of venom
effects because, due to its small molecular size, the half-­life of
FabAV is considerably shorter than that of crotalid venom constituents. Patients with significant envenomation should be followed for
late hematologic abnormalities (coagulopathy) that can occur up
to 2 weeks after the bite. Although these tend to be mild laboratory coagulopathies without clinical bleeding, rare cases of severe
delayed bleeding have been reported. Further antivenom therapy
should be considered for such delayed or recurrent coagulopathy as
outlined in Table 768.4.
In April 2021, the U.S. FDA approved a crotaline immune Fab2
antivenin (Fab2AV) to treat adult and pediatric patients with North
American Crotaline envenomations marketed as AnaVIP. This antidote is an equine-­derived antivenin and, due to it being a Fab2 fragment, has a longer half-­life than the FabAV. It has a similar side
effect profile as the FabAV including anaphylactoid and hypersensitivity reactions. Initial dosing is 10 vials given intravenously over 60
minutes. If the symptoms continue to progress, then 10 vials can be
given every hour until there is no further progression of symptoms.
Patients should be observed for a minimum of 18 hours after the
Fab2AV infusion. If a patient has reemerging symptoms including
coagulopathies, then an additional four vials of the Fab2AV can be
infused (Table 768.5).
Envenomation of the extremities can mimic compartment syndrome, with severe pain and swelling. It is important to treat these
patients aggressively with FabAV or Fab2AV and pain control to
control the severe pain and swelling. Although fasciotomy was once
advocated for the treatment of crotalid snakebites of the extremities,
it is now a treatment of last resort only if aggressive FabAV or Fab2AV
treatment is unable to stop the progression of pain and swelling and
true compartment syndrome is documented with measurement of
intracompartmental pressure.
The antivenom for coral snakes (Micrurus fulvius) has been the
recommended treatment for envenomation by the eastern coral
snake (M. fulvius) and the Texas coral snake (Micrurus tener). Indications for this antivenom are the development of any neurologic signs
and symptoms of coral snake envenomation including paresthesias,
slurred speech, respiratory difficulties, muscle weakness, and fasciculations. Due to it being equine in origin, its side effect profile includes
anaphylaxis and allergic reactions. Most hospitals do not carry this
antivenom and local poison centers should be notified to help locate
supplies. Respiratory supportive care including endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation for respiratory failure remains the
mainstay of treatment.

Disposition

If, after observation for 6-­8 hours, a patient exhibits only fang-­
induced puncture marks with no local or systemic symptoms, the
wounds can be considered dry bites and the patient can be safely discharged home. Patients with significant toxicity and those requiring
treatment with antivenom should be admitted to the hospital. Patients
with a history of eastern or Texas coral snakebite should be admitted
to a monitored setting for 24 hours to observe for neurologic toxicity so that respiratory support can be provided as needed. Children
should be admitted to an intensive care setting if they develop severe
and progressive local tissue toxicity or evidence of systemic toxicity
including coagulopathy, neurotoxicity, hemodynamic instability, or
respiratory difficulties.

SPIDER BITES

In the United States, 18 genera of spiders have been identified that
cause clinically significant envenomation. The spiders of importance in
the United States include the Latrodectus species (the widow spiders)
and the Loxosceles species (the recluse spiders).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 768 u Envenomations 4469
Table 768.2  Pit Viper Envenomation Classification
GRADE

CLINICAL FEATURES

0 (None)

No evidence of envenomation. A fang wound may be present. Pain is
minimal, with less than 1 inch of surrounding edema and erythema. No
systemic manifestations are present during the first 12 hr after the bite.
No laboratory changes occur.

No

ANTIVENOM

Observe for 8-­12 hr. May be
discharged if repeat labs
are normal and no signs of
envenomation develop.

DISPOSITION

I (Minimal)

Pain is moderate or throbbing and localized to the fang wound,
surrounded by 1-­5 inches of edema and erythema. No evidence of
systemic involvement is present after 12 hr of observation. No laboratory
changes occur.

No

Admission for 12-­24 hr. Repeat
labs every 6 hr.
May be discharged if repeat
labs are normal and no signs
of envenomation develop.

II (Moderate)

There is more severe and widely distributed pain, edema spreading toward
the trunk, and petechiae and ecchymoses limited to the area of edema.
Nausea, vomiting, and a mild elevation in temperature are usually present.

Yes

Admission to intensive care
unit.

III (Severe)

This may initially resemble a grade I or II; however, within 12 hr, edema
spreads up the extremity and may involve part of the trunk. Petechiae
and ecchymoses may be generalized. Systemic manifestations may
include tachycardia and hypotension. Laboratory abnormalities may
include an elevated white blood cell count, creatine phosphokinase,
prothrombin time, and partial thromboplastin time, as well as elevated
fibrin degradation products and D-­dimer. Decreased platelets and
fibrinogen are common. Hematuria, myoglobinuria, increased bleeding
time, and renal or hepatic abnormalities may also occur.

Yes

Admission to intensive care
unit.

IV (Very severe)

Sudden pain, rapidly progressive swelling that may reach and involve the
trunk within a few hours, ecchymoses, bleb formation, and necrosis.
Systemic manifestations, often commencing within 15 min of the bite,
usually include weakness, nausea, vomiting, vertigo, and numbness
or tingling of the lips or face. Muscle fasciculations, painful muscular
cramping, pallor, sweating, cold and clammy skin, rapid and weak
pulse, incontinence, convulsions, and coma may also be observed. An
intravenous bite may result in cardiopulmonary arrest soon after the bite.

Yes

Admission to intensive care
unit.

From Curtis AM, Erickson TB. Venomous animal injuries. Walls RM, ed. Rosen’s Emergency Medicine, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table 53.2, p. 696.

Table 768.3  Crotaline Fab Antivenom Dosing Guidelines
DOSE

RECOMMENDATIONS

Initial dose:
four to six vials IV

Maintenance dose:
two vials IV every
6 hr × 3 doses

• Reconstitute each vial of FabAV in 18 mL
normal saline for injection and mix with
continuous manual inversion at the rate of
one to two inversions per second until no
solid material is visible in the vial.
• Further dilute four to six vials of reconstituted
FabAV in 250 mL normal saline.
• Infuse FabAV over 1 hr IV.
• Start with slow infusion rate of 25-­50 mL/hr
for 10 min.
• If no acute allergic reaction occurs, increase
rate to 250 mL/hr to complete infusion.
• The volume of the infusion may be
decreased for the very small child or
volume-­sensitive patient.
• Observe 1 hr after initial dose to assess for
control of envenomation.
• Repeat four to six vials of FabAV as needed
to gain initial control.
• Monitor for delayed or recurrent toxicity
requiring additional FabAV.
• Antivenom dose requirements vary
depending on the individual patient’s
response and clinical course.
• Patients with mild envenomation may not
require maintenance dosing beyond the
initial dose.

Adapted from Goto CS, Feng SY. Crotalidae polyvalent immune Fab for the treatment
of pediatric crotaline envenomations. Ped Emerg Care. 2009;25(4):273–279; and from
Crofab Package Insert (revised 2018).

Table 768.4  Indications for Administration of Additional
Antivenom in Patients with Recurrent
Coagulopathy or Thrombocytopenia After
Initial Control
• Evidence of clinically significant bleeding
• Platelet count below 25,000/mm3
• International normalized ratio (INR) >3
• Activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) >50 seconds
• Fibrinogen <50 mg/dL
• Presence of multicomponent coagulopathy
• Worsening trend in a patient with prior severe coagulopathy
• High-­risk behavior for trauma
• Certain comorbid conditions (e.g., systemic vasculitis, seizure
disorders, prior stroke)
From Norris RL, Bush SP, Cardwell MD. Bites by venomous reptiles in Canada, the U.S.
and Mexico. In: Auerbach PS, ed. Wilderness Medicine, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2017.

Latrodectus Spiders

The Latrodectus species are found throughout the United States and
include L. mactans (Fig. 768.3; black widow spider), L. hesperus (western black widow), L. bishop (red widow spider), L. variolus, and L.
geometricus (brown widow spider). They are indigenous to every state
except Alaska. The classic hourglass-­shape marking is found only in L.
mactans. They like to live close to the ground in secluded and dimly lit
areas such as barns, sheds, and garages.

Venoms and Effects

Latrodectus spiders possess venoms that act at neuromuscular and
autonomic nervous system synapses, resulting in excessive release of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4470 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
Table 768.5  Crotaline Fab2 Antivenom Dosing
Guidelines
Initial Dose:
10 vials (*no known
maximum dose
of Crotaline Fab2
antivenom)

• Reconstitute 10 vials for less than 1 min
each using 10 mL sterile normal saline
per vial
• Combine all vials and dilute to a total
volume of 250 mL sterile normal saline
• Infuse at 25-­50 mL/hr for 10 min; if
tolerated at 250 mL/hr to completion

Evaluate for control

60 minutes after infusion, check for:
• Local injury not progressing
• Coagulation parameters improving
• Systemic effects resolved

Observe

• Observe for at least 18 hr after initial
control
• If symptoms reemerge, can administer
four vials in 250 mL

Adapted from AnaVIP package insert.

Fig. 768.4 Male recluse spider (Loxosceles spp.). Note the distinct

violin-­shaped marking on the dorsum of the cephalothorax. (Courtesy
Michael Cardwell/Extreme Wildlife Photography)

infused slowly with continuous monitoring and preparation to treat
anaphylaxis should it occur.

Loxosceles Spiders
Venoms and Effects

Fig. 768.3 Female black widow spider (Latrodectus mactans). Note

the red hourglass-­shaped marking on the underside of her abdomen.
(From The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Public Health
Image Library, Image #5449.)

neurotransmitters. All of the widow spiders possess similar venoms,
with the most important neurotoxin being α-­latrotoxin.
Bites by the neurotoxic spiders tend to be very painful, and the
offending spider is often seen. Systemic effects may include hypertension, tachycardia, bradycardia, hypersalivation, diaphoresis, and
diffuse muscle spasm. Nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and abdominal rigidity may mimic appendicitis or another acute abdominal
emergency.

Management

The management of a neurotoxic spider envenomation centers on
sound supportive care. Generous doses of opioid analgesics and benzodiazepines should be utilized to ease severe pain and muscle spasm.
Latrodectus antivenom (Wyeth) is equine-­derived and may be considered to reverse severe systemic effects of widow spider envenomation.
Although effective, it is associated with anaphylaxis, serum sickness,
and anaphylactoid reactions and should be reserved for high-­risk
patients such as pregnant women at risk of spontaneous abortion due
to the severe pain. One vial is administered via intravenous infusion.
Efficacy is usually noted within 1 hour of administration, with reversal
of systemic toxicity and relief of pain. Occasionally a second vial is necessary. Due to the possibility of severe or life-­threatening reactions, the
risks and benefits should be carefully considered and the antivenom

The spiders most notorious for their dermonecrotic potential are
the recluse spiders of the genus Loxosceles. The best-­known member
of this genus is the brown recluse (Loxosceles reclusa; Fig. 768.4),
found in the midwestern and southern regions of the United States.
The venom of Loxosceles spiders contains a phospholipase enzyme,
sphingomyelinase D, as well as hyaluronidase. Hyaluronidase is
the spreading factor that enables the venom to penetrate tissues,
but it does not induce tissue damage. Sphingomyelinase D causes
necrosis, red blood cell hemolysis, and platelet serotonin release.
The bite of this spider is generally painless and initially goes unnoticed. A few hours after the bite, the area begins to blister and bleed
and become painful. Within a day or two, the site will ulcerate and
develop violaceous necrosis with surrounding ecchymosis and a
rim of pale ischemia (“red, white, and blue” reaction). The lesion
may gradually expand over a period of days to weeks until necrotic
tissue sloughs and healing begins (Fig. 768.5).
Rare cases of systemic loxoscelism appear to be more common in
young children. Patients present with systemic toxicity, including
fever, chills, nausea, malaise, diffuse macular rash, and petechiae;
they may experience hemolysis, coagulopathy, and renal failure.
In cases of necrotic dermal lesions with no identified spider as
the culprit, a broad differential diagnosis must be considered to
ensure appropriate management. The differential diagnosis includes
skin infections (particularly methicillin-­
resistant Staphylococcus
aureus; see Chapter 227), pyoderma gangrenosum, or ecthyma
gangrenosum.

Management

The management of necrotizing spider bites includes good wound care,
updating of tetanus status, and administration of antibiotics if there is
secondary bacterial infection. Daily wound cleansing and splinting of
the affected area should be provided until the wound has healed.
No therapy has been definitively proven effective in limiting the
extent of necrosis after a recluse spider bite, including steroids, dapsone, colchicine, cyproheptadine, nitroglycerin, hyperbaric oxygen,
and early excision of tissue. Meticulous wound care is the mainstay
of treatment, and large lesions may require delayed secondary closure with skin grafting after clear tissue demarcation has occurred.
Patients with signs and symptoms of systemic loxoscelism should
be admitted to the hospital for supportive treatment of hypovolemia,
coagulopathy, hemolysis, and acute kidney injury. There is no commercially available antivenom in the United States for the management of
necrotizing spider bites such as those from Loxosceles species.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 768 u Envenomations 4471

B

A

C

D

Fig. 768.5 Progression of cutaneous loxoscelism in a Brazilian patient who was bitten inside a house while putting on a shirt. Ulceration and ne-

crosis at day 1 (A), day 9 (B), day 16 (C), and day 25 (D). (From Isbister G, Fan HW. Spider bite. Lancet. 2011;378:2039–2046. Fig. 3. Photographs
by Ceila MS Malaque.)

Disposition

Victims with necrotic skin lesions should be monitored with frequent
outpatient wound checks to determine progression of the lesion.
Children with rapidly progressive dermonecrosis or systemic toxicity
should be admitted to the hospital for supportive therapy, which may
include intensive care admission for hemolysis, coagulopathy, renal
failure, or hypotension.

SCORPION STINGS

There are more than 650 species of scorpions worldwide, some of
which are capable of causing severe or lethal envenomation. In the
United States, there are two clinically significant scorpions: Centruroides exilicauda (the bark scorpion) and Centruroides vittatus. Most
scorpion envenomations occur in the southwestern United States, and
fatalities are rare. In other regions of the world, especially Latin America, Africa, the Middle East, and Asia, a number of scorpions regularly
cause fatalities.

Venoms and Effects

Centruroides scorpion venom contains phospholipase, acetylcholinesterase, hyaluronidase, serotonin, and neurotoxins, resulting in
severe pain and paresthesia as well as systemic symptoms of excessive nerve depolarization and release of acetylcholine and catecholamines. The manifestations of scorpion stings in children vary from
mild to severe and can include autonomic and somatic toxicity. Autonomic toxicity includes hypertension, tachycardia, hypersalivation,
emesis, diaphoresis, and bronchoconstriction, although respiratory
failure is rare. Somatic motor toxicity includes ataxia, fasciculations,
myoclonus, and opsoclonus. Patients are often restless or agitated,
and cranial nerve dysfunction may occur.

Management

Most scorpion stings do not produce severe effects and require only
wound care and orally administered pain medications. However,
patients with more severe symptoms may require intravenous opioids for analgesia and benzodiazepines for severe muscle spasm or
agitation.
A bark scorpion–specific antivenom, Anascorp (Bioclon, Mexico), is
approved by the FDA. This antivenom is recommended for critically ill
patients with neurotoxicity or other severe symptoms, including intractable pain that is not responsive to adequate doses of opioid analgesics.
Small children are more likely than adults to develop such severe symptoms. It is best to discuss antivenom therapy with the regional poison
control center for guidance.

Disposition

Patients who have had mild scorpion stings with only local effects can
be safely discharged home with wound care instructions, analgesics,
and close outpatient follow-­
up. Patients with evolving symptoms,
intractable pain, neurotoxicity, or other systemic toxicity should be
admitted to the hospital, especially if scorpion antivenom is being considered. Those with severe toxicity should be admitted to an intensive
care unit.

HYMENOPTERA STINGS

The insect order Hymenoptera includes the stinging ants, bees, and
wasps, which are characterized by the presence of a modified ovipositor (the “sting” or “stinger”) at the end of the abdomen through
which venom is injected. Various members of the order can be found
throughout the world.

Venoms and Effects

Hymenoptera venom is a complex mixture of proteins, enzymes, and
vasoactive substances that result in local tissue injury and inflammation. Most stings cause only local pain, redness, and swelling followed
by itching and resolution. Some patients experience a large local reaction in which swelling progresses beyond the sting site, possibly involving the entire extremity. Approximately 0.4–0.8% of children and 3% of
adults are at risk for acute, life-­threatening allergic reactions as a result
of Hymenoptera venom sensitivity; anaphylaxis due to Hymenoptera
envenomation causes an average of 62 deaths annually in the United
States (see Chapter 187). Rare cases of delayed serum sickness can follow Hymenoptera stings (see Chapter 191). Africanized honeybees
(Apis mellifera scutellata), an aggressive hybrid of western honeybee
species with African bee species, can cause massive stinging episodes
resulting in systemic venom toxicity with hypotension, respiratory failure, shock, hemolysis, and renal failure.

Management

Patients with typical local reactions can be treated with supportive care
including analgesics and antihistamines as needed. Patients with large
local reactions should also receive a course of oral corticosteroids and
a prescription for an epinephrine autoinjection kit including instructions in its use before discharge. Patients presenting with urticaria,
angioedema, wheezing, or hypotension should be treated with aggressive supportive care including standard therapy for anaphylaxis such
as intramuscular epinephrine, corticosteroids, antihistamines, intravenous fluids, oxygen, and airway management as needed (see Chapter
190). Patients suffering massive stinging episodes may also require
critical care resuscitation.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4472 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
Disposition

Patients with local reactions can be discharged with continued outpatient care that may include analgesia and antihistamines. More difficult disposition decisions are involved for children with systemic
manifestations. Children with only diffuse urticaria who are stable
after a period of observation can be discharged home to continue a
short course of antihistamines and steroids and to carry an epinephrine
self-­administration kit. These children are at low risk for progressing to
systemic anaphylaxis with future stings. Children suffering more than
simple urticaria (e.g., wheezing, evidence of laryngeal edema or cardiovascular instability) should be treated aggressively and admitted for at
least 24 hours of observation. They should receive a referral to allergy/
immunology to test for Hymenoptera venom sensitivity and possible
immunotherapy. Immunotherapy reduces the risk of systemic anaphylaxis from future stings in high-­risk patients from 30–60% to <5%.

the spine, often with retained debris (spine fragments, glandular tissue,
and sand). The venom has vasoconstrictive properties that can result in
tissue necrosis and poor wound healing. Stingray envenomations are
noteworthy for immediate and intense pain at the site of injury that
lasts 24-­48 hours. Some patients experience nausea, vomiting, and
muscle cramps. Rarely, hypotension or seizures occur.
The Scorpaenidae have venomous dorsal, pelvic, and anal spines that
become erect when the animal is threatened. The venom glands associated with these spines contain multiple toxins, enzymes, and vasoactive
substances. Envenomation causes immediate severe pain that may persist for hours or days. Victims may experience local tissue destruction,
and superinfections are common. Systemic symptoms include diaphoresis, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, muscle cramping,
and headache. In severe cases, paralysis, respiratory failure, hypotension, dysrhythmias, and cardiovascular collapse have been reported.

MARINE ENVENOMATION

Management

The classes of venomous marine animals that cause the most morbidity
and mortality in humans are the Cnidaria (including jellyfish, the Portuguese man-­of-­war, Pacific blue bottle, fire coral, sea nettles, anemones, and others), Mollusca (blue-­ringed octopus and cone snails),
Chondrichthyes (stingrays), and members of the family Scorpaenidae
(lionfish, scorpionfish, and stonefish).

Venoms and Effects

All members of the Cnidaria have unique stinging cells called nematocysts. These cells contain a highly folded tubule that discharges on
contact, penetrates the skin, and injects venom. The venom is antigenic
and can be dermonecrotic, hemolytic, cardiotoxic, or neuropathic,
depending on the species. The Pacific box jellyfish (Chironex fleckeri)
of Australia, with its cardiotoxic venom, is known to cause stings that
are rapidly fatal due to cardiac arrest and pulmonary edema. Although
fatal anaphylaxis to jellyfish stings has been reported in coastal waters
of the United States, these events are rare. For clinicians in the Americas, the primary concern with Cnidaria envenomation is localized pain
that may be associated with paresthesias or pruritus. Occasionally, victims may have systemic symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, headache,
and chills.
The phylum Mollusca includes octopi and cone snails (Conus sp.).
The octopus of toxicologic significance is the Hapalochlaena maculosa
(blue-­ringed octopus), which is primarily found in Australian waters.
The blue-­ringed octopus secretes tetrodotoxin (the same toxin found
in pufferfish) in its salivary gland. The beak of the octopus punctures
the skin and delivers the tetrodotoxin. Tetrodotoxin blocks sodium
channels in neurons, leading to paralysis. The venom also contains
other toxins, including vasoactive agents and enzymes that cause local
tissue injury. Cone snails have a hollow proboscis with a tooth that can
be extended to inject venom into the victim. Venom of the Conus species contains conotoxins that target multiple receptors, including voltage, ligand, and G-­mediated receptors. Conotoxins cause a variety of
symptoms including severe pain, weakness, tissue ischemia, cyanosis,
and numbness. Systemic symptoms are usually neurologic and include
aphonia, aphasia, weakness, paralysis, respiratory failure, cardiovascular collapse, and ultimately death.
The stingray has a sharp, retroserrated spine and associated venom
gland at the base of its tail. Envenomation often occurs when the victim
steps on the animal hidden in the surf and the tail is whipped around to
puncture the lower extremity. Injuries involve jagged lacerations from

Treatment of Cnidaria stings should begin immediately after envenomation. Dousing the sting site with vinegar has been shown to inhibit
nematocyst discharge. If vinegar is not immediately available, the area
should be washed with seawater; freshwater should be avoided as it
is thought to stimulate firing of remaining nematocysts. Visible tentacle fragments should be removed with a gloved hand or forceps, and
microscopic fragments may be removed by gently shaving the affected
area. Folk remedies such as rubbing the sting with sand and applying
urine are not helpful and cause more irritation. Meat tenderizer is usually not effective. Antihistamines and corticosteroids are indicated for
swelling and urticaria. An acute anaphylactic reaction should be treated
with intramuscular epinephrine. Antibiotics are usually not necessary.
Patients who have been envenomated by Mollusca are treated supportively. There are no antivenoms available for either the blue-­ringed
octopus or the cone snails. Adequate pain control should be provided
as needed. Cardiovascular support may be required, and severe neurologic toxicity such as respiratory failure should be managed via airway
management and mechanical ventilation.
Treatment of stingray and Scorpaenidae stings is similar. These
toxins are heat-­labile, and immersion in hot water (approximately
42°C [107.6°F]) for 30-­60 minutes denatures the protein constituents
and decreases pain significantly. The wounds should be thoroughly
cleansed and explored with use of local or regional anesthesia to rule
out retention of spine or integument fragments. Stingray spines are
radiopaque and may be seen on radiographs or identified by ultrasonography. Lacerations should be treated with delayed primary closure
or allowed to heal by secondary intention. Systemic analgesia should
be provided as needed. Because of the risk of secondary bacterial infection, there should be a low threshold for administering prophylactic
antibiotics to cover Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and Vibrio species,
and wounds should be rechecked at 3 and 7 days postinjury. An equine
Fab stonefish antivenom is available for severe stonefish envenomation
with systemic toxicity or intractable pain.

Disposition

After wound care and effective analgesia, most victims can be discharged home. If there are significant systemic effects, the patient
should be admitted for monitoring and further care as needed.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Laboratory Medicine
Chapter 769

Laboratory Testing in
Infants and Children
Stanley F. Lo and Stephen M. Roper
Normal values (reference intervals) are difficult to establish within
the pediatric population. Differences in genetic composition,
physiologic development, environmental influences, and subclinical disease are variables that need to be considered when developing reference intervals. Other considerations for further defining
reference intervals include partitioning based on sex and age. The
most commonly used reference range is generally given as the mean
of the reference population ±2 standard deviations (SD). This is
acceptable when the distribution of results for the tested population
is essentially gaussian (normal). The serum sodium concentration
in children, which is tightly controlled physiologically, has a distribution that is essentially gaussian; the mean value ±2 SD gives a
range very close to that actually observed in 95% of children (Table
769.1). However, not all analytes have a gaussian distribution. The
serum creatine kinase level, which is subject to diverse influences
and is not actively controlled, does not show a gaussian distribution, as evidenced by the lack of agreement between the range actually observed and that predicted by the mean value ±2 SD. In these
cases, a reference interval defining the 2.5-­97.5 percentiles is typically used.
Reference cutoffs are typically established from large studies
with a healthy reference population. Examples of these cutoffs are
illustrated by reference cutoffs established for cholesterol, lipoproteins, and neonatal bilirubin. Patient results exceeding these cutoffs
have a future risk of acquiring disease. A final modification needed
for reporting reference intervals is referencing the Tanner stage of
sexual maturation (sexual maturity rating scale), which is most useful in assessing pituitary and gonadal function.
The establishment of common reference intervals remains an elusive target. Although some patient results are directly comparable
between laboratories and methods, most are not. Careful interpretation of patient results must consider when testing was performed
and what method was used. Higher-­order methods, methods that
are more accurate and precise, continue to be slowly developed.
These will be critical to the standardization of tests and the establishment of common reference intervals.

COMMON CHALLENGES IN PEDIATRIC
LABORATORY MEDICINE

There are several challenges in pediatric lab medicine that are
encountered infrequently, are less consequential, or do not apply
to adult populations. For example, the rate of in-­vitro hemolysis
is increased in children because of the use of inappropriate needle
or tubes sizes, applying too much pressure to the site of a finger or
heel-­stick collection, or simply drawing a specimen rapidly to minimize the discomfort of the child. Hemolyzed specimens can lead to

PART

XXXIII

inaccurate results for several analytes because of spectrophotometric interference caused by hemoglobin, dilution effects, or because
of the release of other red blood cell components (e.g., lactate dehydrogenase [LDH]). A related issue is the frequent occurrence of
physiologic jaundice. Like hemoglobin, bilirubin can absorb light
and influence with spectrophotometric analyses. Although many
chemistry analyzers can detect these interferences and suppress
affected results, specimens frequently must be recollected. Likewise,
the increased hematocrit common in the first month of life can lead
to decreased amount of plasma/serum from a given blood volume.
This phenomenon can result in the need for repeat phlebotomy or
larger starting volumes of whole blood. In addition to blood, urine
is another difficult fluid to work with in children. Noninvasive urine
collections from infants often require special collection techniques
(bags, cotton balls) that may only capture small volumes. Coupled
with the relatively dilute urine typically produced by newborns,
urine specimens may require concentration, or analyzer measurement ranges may need to be adjusted to provide useful information. Other challenges in pediatric lab medicine include, but are not
limited to, the use of small (“bullet”) blood collection tubes that are
incompatible with automated sample handlers, the need for specialized testing (e.g., sweat test, newborn screening), and working with
specimens drawn from indwelling catheters that may be contaminated with IV or total parenteral nutrition (TPN) fluid.

ACCURACY AND PRECISION OF LABORATORY TESTS

Technical accuracy, or trueness, is an important consideration in interpreting the results of a laboratory test. Because of improvements in
methods of analysis and elimination of analytic interference, the accuracy of most tests is limited primarily by their precision. Accuracy is
a measure of the nearness of a test result to the actual value, whereas
precision is a measure of the reproducibility of a result. No test can
be more accurate than it is precise. Analysis of precision by repetitive
measurements of a single sample gives rise to a gaussian distribution
with a mean and an SD. The estimate of precision is the coefficient of
variation (CV):
SD
CV =
× 100
Mean
The CV is not likely to be constant over the full range of values
obtained in clinical testing, but it is approximately 5% in the normal range. The CV is generally not reported but is always known
by the laboratory. It is particularly important in assessing the significance of changes in laboratory results. For example, a common
situation is the need to assess hepatotoxicity incurred because of
the administration of a therapeutic drug and reflected in the serum
alanine transaminase (aminotransferase) (ALT) value. If serum
ALT increases from 25 units/L to 40 units/L, is the change significant? The CV for ALT is 7%. Using the value obtained ±2 × CV to
express the extremes of imprecision, a value of 25 units/L is unlikely
to reflect an actual concentration of >29 units/L, and a value of 40
units/L is unlikely to reflect an actual concentration of <34 units/L.
Therefore the change in the value as obtained by testing is likely to
reflect a real change in circulating ALT levels. Continued monitoring of serum ALT is indicated, even though both values for ALT are
within normal limits. Likely in this case is only a probability. Inherent biologic variability is such that the results of two successive tests
may suggest a trend that will disappear on further testing.

4472.e3
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4472.e4 Part XXXIII u Laboratory Medicine
Table 769.1  Gaussian and Nongaussian Laboratory
Values in 458 Normal Schoolchildren 7-­14
Years Old
SERUM SODIUM
(MMOL/L)

SERUM CREATINE
KINASE (UNITS/L)

Mean

141

68

Standard
deviation (SD)

1.7

34

Mean ±2 SD

138-­144

0-­136

Actual 95% range

137-­144

24-­162

The precision of a test may also be indicated by providing confidence
limits for a given result. Usually, 95% confidence limits are used, indicating that it is 95% certain that the value obtained lies between the two
limits reported. Confidence limits are calculated using the mean and
SD of replicate determinations:
95 % confidence limits = Mean ± t × SD

where t is a constant derived from the number of replications. In
most cases, t = 2.
Accuracy is expressed by determining the difference, or bias,
between results from a comparative method and a definitive or reference method. A definitive or reference method provides results
with increased precision and accuracy compared with the clinical
laboratory. When these methods are used, along with highly purified materials (i.e., Standard Reference Materials from the National
Institute of Standards and Technology) to establish values for assay
calibrators used in the clinical laboratory, the accuracy of patient
results is improved. Creatinine, hemoglobin A1c, and neonatal bilirubin are examples in which the accuracy of these tests has been
improved.

SENSITIVITY, ACCURACY, AND ANALYTIC TESTING

In some circumstances, the sensitivity and accuracy of an analysis are
reduced or increased as functions of clinical purpose. For example, ion
exchange chromatography of plasma amino acids for the diagnosis of
inborn errors of metabolism is usually performed at an analytic sensitivity that allows measurement of all the amino acids with a single set
of standards. The range of values is approximately 20-­800 μmol/L, and
accuracy is poor at values ≤20 μmol/L. The detection of homocysteine
in this type of analysis suggests an inborn error of methionine metabolism. If the analysis is adjusted to achieve greater analytic sensitivity,
it is possible to measure homocysteine accurately in normal plasma
(3-­12 μmol/L). This more sensitive test is used to assess cobalamin and
folate status.

PREDICTIVE VALUE OF LABORATORY TESTS

Predictive value (PV) theory deals with the usefulness of tests as
defined by their clinical sensitivity (ability to detect a disease) and
specificity (ability to define the absence of a disease).
Sensitivity =
Specificity =

Number positive by test
Total number positive

× 100

Number negative by test
Total number without disease

PV of
positive test result

PV of
negative test result

× 100

True-positive results
Total positive results

 100

True-negative results
Total negative results

 100

The problems addressed by PV theory are false-­negative and false-­
positive test results. Both are major considerations in interpreting the
results of screening tests in general and neonatal screening tests in
particular.
Testing for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) seroreactivity illustrates some of these considerations. If it is assumed that
approximately 1,100,000 of 284,000,000 residents of the United States
are infected with HIV (prevalence = 0.39%) and that 90% of those
infected demonstrate antibodies to HIV, then we can consider the
usefulness of a simple test with 99% sensitivity and 99.5% specificity
(see Chapter 322). If the entire population of the United States were
screened, it would be possible to identify most of those infected with
HIV:
1,100,000 × 0.9× 0.99 = 980,100  89.1% 
However, there will be 119,900 false-­negative test results. And even
with 99.5% specificity, the number of false-­positive test results would
be larger than the number of true-­positive results:
284,000,000  0.005 
1,420,000

In addition, there will be 281,480,000 true-­negative results:
PV of positive test result =
PV of negative test result =

980,100

 980,100  1, 420,000 
281, 480,000

 281, 480,000  119,900 

×100  41%
×100  99.96%

Given the high cost associated with follow-­up and the anguish produced by a false-­positive result, it is easy to see why universal screening for HIV seropositivity received a low priority immediately after the
introduction of testing for HIV infection.
By contrast, we can consider the screening of 100,000 individuals from groups at increased risk for HIV in whom the overall
prevalence of disease is 10%, with all other considerations being
unchanged.
True
-positive results 0.9

× 0.99 ×10,000 8,910
False-positive

results 0.005×

90,000 450
False-negative results  10,000  8,910  1,090
PV of positive

test result

8,910

×100 95%
8,910  450

PV of 
negative test result

89,500
×100 99%

89,550 +1,090

These two hypothetical testing strategies show that the diagnostic
efficiency of testing depends heavily on the prevalence of the disease being tested for, even with a superior test, such as the test for
HIV antibodies. Because the treatment of pregnant women infected
with HIV is effective in preventing vertical transmission, screening
has now been expanded to all pregnant women. The proven effectiveness of current therapy in preventing neonatal infection has
intensified screening for HIV early in pregnancy.
However, because of the long time needed to test for HIV antibodies, it was difficult to screen women during labor and provide
the necessary therapy. Rapid HIV antibody testing procedures
using a fingerstick or venipuncture to obtain whole blood, plasma,
or serum, and tests using oral fluid were approved (Table 769.2).
The HIV test results are usually obtained in <20 minutes. The collection of oral fluid samples provides an alternative for individuals who avoid HIV testing because of their dislike of needlesticks.
HIV testing using whole blood or oral fluid is classified as a waived
test under the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 769 u Laboratory Testing in Infants and Children

4472.e5

Table 769.2  Rapid HIV Antibody Tests and Status Under CLIA
TIME FOR PERFORMING ASSAY

WAIT TIME TO
READ RESULTS

<5 min

20-­40 min

OraSure Technologies
www.orasure.com

<5 min

10-­12 min

Trinity Biotech
www.trinitybiotech.com

Moderate complexity

<5 min

Read result
immediately

MedMira
www.medmira.com

Serum and plasma

Moderate complexity

10-­15 min

Result can
be read
immediately or
up to 4 hr later

BioRad Laboratories
www.bio-­rad.com

Clearview
HIV 1/2 STAT-­PAK
and Clearview
COMPLETE HIV 1/2

Whole blood (fingerstick
or venipuncture)

Waived

5 min

15-­20 min

Alere
www.alere.com

Serum and plasma

Waived

5 min

15-­20 min

Alere

Clearview Determine
HIV1/2 Ag/Ab
Combo

Whole blood (fingerstick
or venipuncture)

Waived

5 min

20 min

Alere

Serum and plasma

Waived

5 min

20 min

Chembio Diagnostic
Systems; distributed by
Alere

RAPID HIV TEST

SPECIMEN TYPE

CLIA CATEGORY

OraQuick ADVANCE
Rapid HIV-­1/2
Antibody Test

Oral fluid
Whole blood (fingerstick
or venipuncture)

Waived
Waived

Plasma

Moderate complexity

Whole blood (fingerstick
or venipuncture)

Waived

Serum and plasma

Moderate complexity

Reveal G4 Rapid
HIV-­1 Antibody Test

Serum and plasma

MultiSpot HIV-­1/HIV-­2
Rapid Test

Uni-­Gold
Recombigen HIV-­1

MANUFACTURER

Ag/Ab, Antigen/antibody; CLIA, Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments of 1988; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus.

1988 (CLIA), and these tests are allowed in a point-­of-­care setting.
Waived tests are laboratory procedures that use methodologies that
are so simple and accurate as to render the likelihood of an erroneous result by the user negligible. A positive rapid HIV test result is
then confirmed by nucleic acid amplification testing or immunofluorescence assay.
According to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 174 infants were born with HIV in 2014 in the United
States. Rapid HIV testing during labor allows for implementation of
antiretroviral therapy for HIV-­infected women who have not been
tested or are unaware of their HIV status. The initiation of therapy
at the time of labor or within the first 12 hours of an infant’s birth
significantly reduces the risk of mother-­to-­child transmission. In
the mother–infant rapid intervention at delivery study, it was shown
that the sensitivity and specificity of a rapid whole blood test for
HIV during labor were 100% and 99.9%, respectively, with a positive PV of 90%. The median turnaround time for obtaining results
from blood collection to patient notification was only 66 minutes.
The performance of the rapid blood test was better than that of the
standard HIV enzyme immunoassay, which had a sensitivity and
specificity of 100% and 99.8%, respectively, with a positive PV of
76%. In addition, the median turnaround time from blood collection to patient notification was 28 hours. As a result, rapid whole
blood HIV testing is now the standard of care for women in labor
with undocumented HIV status.
Rapid HIV testing can also be used in developing countries. In
resource-­poor settings, because of the lack of properly equipped laboratories, skilled technologists, and basic resources, such as electricity and water, these self-­contained, point-­of-­care HIV tests are very
attractive. In areas of Asia and Africa where HIV is epidemic, screening pregnant women with rapid HIV tests and offering antiretroviral

therapy can significantly reduce the transmission of HIV to hundreds
of thousands of infants.

NEONATAL SCREENING TESTS

Almost all the diseases detected in neonatal screening programs
have a very low prevalence, and for the most part, the tests are quantitative rather than qualitative. In general, the strategy is to use the
initial screening test to separate a highly suspect group of patients
from normal infants (i.e., to increase the prevalence) and then to
follow this suspect group aggressively. Two common strategies
are used to detect congenital hypothyroidism (see Chapter 603):
one uses thyroid-­stimulating hormone for the initial screen, and
the other uses thyroxine. In the thyroxine strategy for congenital
hypothyroidism, which has a prevalence of 25 in 100,000 liveborn
infants, the initial test performed is for thyroxine in whole blood.
Infants with the lowest 10% of test results are considered suspect. If
all infants with hypothyroidism were included in the suspect group,
the prevalence of disease in this group would be 250 in 100,000
infants. The original samples obtained from the suspect group are
retested for thyroxine and are tested for thyroid-­stimulating hormone. This second round of testing results in an even more highly
suspect group composed of 0.1% of the infants screened and having a prevalence of hypothyroidism of 25,000 in 100,000 individuals. This final group is aggressively pursued for further testing and
treatment. Even with a 1,000-­fold increase in prevalence, 75% of
the aggressively tested population is euthyroid. The justifications
advanced for the program are that treatment is easy and effective
and that the alternative if congenital hypothyroidism is undetected
and untreated—long-­term custodial care—is both unsatisfactory
and expensive.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4472.e6 Part XXXIII u Laboratory Medicine
At its inception, newborn screening was driven by the selection of
genetic diseases whose clinical manifestations developed postnatally,
such as phenylketonuria, galactosemia, and hypothyroidism. Diseases
selected for screening typically had to meet certain criteria. The prevalence of disease had to meet a minimum, typically 1 in 100,000. Disease
selection required demonstrated reduction in morbidity and mortality
in the neonatal period. Effective therapies needed to be available, and
the cost of screening and the feasibility of laboratory testing were also
considerations in this selection process.
More common diseases have also become targets for neonatal
screening programs. Sickle cell disease (see Chapter 511.1), easily
detected using liquid chromatography or isoelectric focusing, can
be treated more effectively if it is diagnosed before clinical signs
appear. In addition, the results of neonatal screening for cystic
fibrosis (CF; see Chapter 454) show clear benefits associated with
preclinical diagnosis but also some inherent difficulties associated
with genetic screening for complex autosomal recessive diseases
that are common and are caused by a rather large number of pathogenic variants (>1,500) of a single gene. The definitive diagnostic
test for CF is the measurement of concentrations of chloride in
sweat, a test that is not practical during the first week of life. Neonates with CF generally have elevations in whole blood trypsinogen. This test allows the identification of a group of neonates at risk
for CF. Unfortunately, trypsinogen as an initial screening test has a
high false-­positive rate, an unfavorable characteristic that creates
unnecessary anxiety among newborn parents and families and is
costly because of the time and expense for medical follow-­up. Performing DNA analysis for common variants that cause CF reduces
the size of the suspect group and identifies neonates with a higher
likelihood of disease. This two-­tiered strategy identifies a manageable number of infants for whom to perform sweat tests. Problems
include the following: (1) uncommon variants are not included in
the screening panel, and cases of CF caused by these variants can be
missed; (2) common variants that cause clinically innocent elevations of whole blood trypsinogen in heterozygous neonates cause
potentially alarming false-­positive findings; and (3) CF in patients
with normal sweat test results is rare but is likely to be missed.
Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) is a technically advanced
method in which many compounds are initially ionized and separated by molecular weight. Each compound is then fragmented,
and the identification of compounds is based on characteristic fragments. The process requires approximately 2 minutes per sample
and can detect 20 or more inborn errors of metabolism. The effects
of prematurity, neonatal illness, and intensive neonatal management on metabolites in blood complicate the interpretation of
results. The PV of a positive screening result is likely to be <10%;
that is, 90% of positive results are not indicative of a genetic disorder of metabolism. Nonetheless, MS/MS permits a diagnosis to
be made before clinical illness develops and has revolutionized the
purpose and ability of newborn screening. MS/MS is not directed
toward diseases defined as treatable, but it is directed toward all the
diseases, each of which is rare, that the technique can identify.
MS/MS permits the detection of rare inborn errors of metabolism
and has been introduced as a newborn screening tool worldwide.
Since 1998, when mass spectrometry was implemented in Australia,
the rate of detection per 100,000 births has been 15.7, significantly
higher than the rate of 8.6-­9.5 in the six preceding 4-­year periods. Disorders of fatty acid oxidation, particularly medium-­chain acyl coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency (see Chapter 106.1), accounted for
the majority of increased diagnoses. Expanded newborn screening
programs using MS/MS increase the detection of inherited metabolic
disorders. All states in the United States use MS/MS in their neonatal
screening programs; the metabolic conditions screened range from
31 to >50.
In an attempt to standardize newborn screening programs, the
American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG) recommended that
every baby born in the United States be screened for a core panel

of 29 disorders (Table 769.3). An additional 25 conditions were
recommended as secondary targets because they may be identified
while screening for the core panel disorders. The March of Dimes
and the American Academy of Pediatrics also endorse the ACMG
recommendations. However, expansion of the screening test menu
raises several issues. The cost of implementation can be significant
because many states will need multiple MS/MS systems. Staffing
the laboratory with qualified technical personnel to run the MS/
MS system and qualified clinical scientists to interpret the profiles
can be a challenge. A number of false-­positive results will also be
obtained with these newborn screening programs. Many of these
findings are the result of parenteral nutrition, biologic variation, or
treatment and are not the result of an inborn error of metabolism.
Consequently, qualified staff will be needed to ensure that patients
with abnormal results are contacted and receive follow-­up testing
and counseling, if needed. Even with these concerns, the ACMG
report is a step in the right direction toward standardizing guidelines for state newborn screening programs.

TESTING IN REFINING A DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The use of laboratory tests in refining a differential diagnosis satisfies PV theory because a correct differential diagnosis should result
in a relatively high prevalence of the disease under consideration.
An example of testing in refining a differential diagnosis is the measurement of urinary vanillylmandelic acid (VMA) for the diagnosis
of neuroblastoma (see Chapter 547). A simple spot test for VMA is
not useful in general screening programs because of the low prevalence of neuroblastoma (3 cases/100,000) and the low sensitivity
of the test (69%). Even though the specificity of urinary VMA is
99.6%, testing of 100,000 children would produce 2 true-­positive
test results, 400 false-­positive results, and 1 false-­negative result.
The PV of a positive result in this setting is 0.5%, and the PV of a
negative result is 99.99%, not much different from the assumption

Table 769.3  American College of Medical Genetics Core
Panel of Neonatal Screening Tests
Isovalericacidemia
Glutaric aciduria type 1
3-­Hydroxy-­3-­methylglutaricaciduria
Multiple coenzyme A (CoA) carboxylase deficiency
Methylmalonic acidemia (mutase deficiency)
3-­Methylcrotonyl CoA carboxylase deficiency
Methylmalonic acidemia (cobalamin [Cbl] A, B)
Propionic acidemia
β-­Ketothiolase deficiency
Medium-­chain acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase deficiency
Very-­long-­chain acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase deficiency
Long-­chain l-­3-­hydroxy acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase deficiency
Trifunctional protein deficiency
Carnitine uptake deficiency
Phenylketonuria
Maple syrup urine disease
Homocystinuria (because of cystathionine β-­synthase deficiency)
Citrullinemia
Argininosuccinic acidemia
Tyrosinemia type 1
Sickle cell anemia (Hb SS disease)
Hemoglobin (Hb) S/β-­thalassemia
Hb S/C disease
Congenital hypothyroidism
Biotinidase deficiency
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (21-­hydroxylase deficiency)
Classic galactosemia
Hearing loss
Cystic fibrosis

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 769 u Laboratory Testing in Infants and Children
that neuroblastoma is not present. Testing for urinary VMA in a
3-­year-­old child with an abdominal mass, however, gives a useful
result because the prevalence of neuroblastoma is at least 50% in
3-­year-­old children with abdominal masses. If 100 such children are
tested and the prevalence of neuroblastoma in the group is assumed
to be 50%, a satisfactory PV is obtained.
PV of positive test result =
PV of negative test result =

0.69 × 50
0.69 × 50 + (0.004 × 50)
0.996 × 50
0.996 × 50 + (0.31 × 50)

× 100 = 99 %
× 100 = 76 %

Thus, in this situation, a test with low sensitivity is powerful
in refining the differential diagnosis because the PV of a positive
result is almost 100% in the setting of high prevalence.

Serologic Testing

Using laboratory testing to refine a differential diagnosis poses
problems, as exemplified by serologic testing for Lyme disease,
which is a tick-­borne infection by Borrelia burgdorferi that has various manifestations in both early and late stages of infection (see
Chapter 268). Direct demonstration of the organism is difficult, and
serologic test results for Lyme disease are not reliably positive in
young patients presenting early with erythema chronicum migrans.
These results become positive after a few weeks of infection and
remain positive for a number of years. In an older population being
evaluated for late-­stage Lyme disease, some individuals will have
recovered from either clinical or subclinical Lyme disease, and
some will have active Lyme disease, with both groups having true-­
positive serologic test results. Of individuals without Lyme disease,
some will have true-­negative serologic test results, but a significant
percentage will have antibodies to other organisms that cross-­react
with B. burgdorferi antigens.
This set of circumstances gives rise to a number of problems.
First, the protean nature of Lyme disease makes it difficult to
ensure a high prevalence of disease in persons to be tested. Second, the most appropriate antibodies to be detected are imperfectly
defined, leading to a wide variety of tests with varying false-­positive
and false-­negative rates. Third, the natural history of the antibody
response to infection and the difficulty of showing the causative
organism directly combine to make laboratory diagnosis of early
Lyme disease difficult. Fourth, in the diagnosis of late-­stage Lyme
disease in older individuals, the laboratory diagnosis is plagued by
misleading positive (either false-­positive or true-­positive, but not
clinically relevant) results, typically an enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) that uses whole B. burgdorferi organisms. In a
review of 788 patients referred to a specialty clinic with the diagnosis of Lyme disease, the diagnosis was correct in 180 patients, 156
patients had true seropositivity without active Lyme disease, and
452 had never had Lyme disease, even though 45% of them were
found to be seropositive by at least one test before referral.
A two-­step approach, similar to that used in HIV testing, is often
used: a screening test that has high sensitivity (e.g., ELISA) and
excellent negative PV, followed by a very specific confirmatory test
for verification of positive screening test results (e.g., Western blot
to detect antibodies to selected bacterial antigens). Negative screening test results and negative verification test results are reported
as negative. Positive verification test results are reported as positive. However, standardization of the testing procedures is difficult
in North America, where only one pathogenic strain of B. burgdorferi is found, and is more difficult elsewhere in the Northern
hemisphere, where as many as three pathogenic strains are present.

4472.e7

Table 769.4  Laboratory Profile as a Review of Systems
LABORATORY TEST

ASSESSMENT FACILITATED BY
TESTS

Complete blood cell count and
platelets

Nutrition, status of formed
elements

Complete urinalysis

Renal function/genitourinary
tract inflammation

Albumin and cholesterol

Nutrition

ALT, bilirubin, GGT

Liver function

BUN, creatinine

Renal function, nutrition

Sodium, potassium, chloride,
bicarbonate

Electrolyte homeostasis

Calcium and phosphorus

Calcium homeostasis

ALT, Alanine transaminase; BUN, blood urea nitrogen; GGT, γ-­glutamyltransferase.

Identification of microbial DNA in body fluids by polymerase chain
reaction is definitive but invasive.

Laboratory Screening

Screening profiles are used as part of a complete review of systems, to
establish a baseline value, or to facilitate patient care in specific circumstances, such as (1) when a patient clearly has an illness, but a specific
diagnosis remains elusive; (2) when a patient requires intensive care;
(3) for postmarketing surveillance and evaluation of a new drug; and
(4) when a drug is used that is known to have systemic adverse effects.
Laboratory screening tests should be used in a targeted manner to supplement, not supplant, a complete history and physical examination
(Table 769.4).

Bibliography
American Academy of Pediatrics. American Thyroid Association: newborn screening
for congenital hypothyroidism. Pediatrics. 1987;80:745–749.
Bulterys M, Jamieson DJ, O’Sullivan MJ, et al. Rapid HIV-­1 testing during labor: a
multicenter study. JAMA. 2004;292:219–223.
Clayton EW. Issues in state newborn screening programs. Pediatrics. 1992;90:641–
646.
Farrell PM, Kosrok MR, Rock MJ, et al. Early diagnosis of cystic fibrosis through
neonatal screening prevents severe malnutrition and improves long-­term growth.
Pediatrics. 2001;107:1–13.
Galen RS, Gambino SR. Beyond Normality. New York: Academic Press; 1975.
Hu LT, Klempner MS. Update on the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of Lyme
disease. Adv Intern Med. 2001;46:247–275.
Minamitani K, Inomata H. Neonatal screening for congenital hypothyroidism in Japan. Pediatr Endocrinol Rev. 2012;10(suppl 1):79–88.
National Newborn Screening and Genetic Resource Center. Newborn screening information. http://genes-­r-­us.uthscsa.edu.
Rinaldo P, Tortorelli S, Matern D. Recent developments and new applications of tandem mass spectrometry in newborn screening. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2004;16:427–
433.
Steere AC, Taylor E, McHugh GL, et al. The overdiagnosis of Lyme disease. JAMA.
1993;269:1812–1826.
Sun A, Lam C, Wong DA. Expanded newborn screening for inborn errors of metabolism: overview and outcomes. Adv Pediatr. 2012;59(1):209–245.
Watson MS, Mann MJ, Lloyd-­Puryear MA, et al. Newborn screening: towards a uniform screening panel and system. Genet Med. 2006;8(Suppl):S12–S252.
Wilcken B, Wiley V, Hammond J, et al. Screening newborns for inborn errors of
metabolism by tandem mass spectrometry. N Engl J Med. 2003;348:2304–2312.
Zytkovicz TH, Fitzgerald EF, Marsden D, et al. Tandem mass spectrometric analysis
for amino, organic, and fatty acid disorders in newborn dried blood spots: a two-­
year summary from the New England Newborn Screening Program. Clin Chem.
2001;47:1945–1955.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4472.e8 Part XXXIII u Laboratory Medicine

Chapter 770

Table 770.2  Abbreviations Used in Table 770.5

Reference Intervals for
Laboratory Tests and
Procedures

Ab

Absorbance

AU

Arbitrary unit

BB

Brain isoenzyme of
creatine kinase

cap
CH50

mm3

Cubic millimeter,
microliter (μL)

mm Hg

Millimeters of mercury

mmol

Millimole

Capillary

mo

Month, months

Dilution required
to lyse 50% of
indicator red blood
cells; indicates
complement activity

mol

Mole

mOsm

Milliosmole

MW

Relative molecular
weight

Cr

Creatinine

ND

Not detected

CSF

Cerebrospinal fluid

nm

F

Female

Nanometer
(wavelength)

g

Gram, grams

Pa

Pascal(s)

G6PD

Glucose-­6-­phosphate
dehydrogenase

pc

Postprandial

RBC

Hb

Hemoglobin

Red blood cell(s),
erythrocyte(s)

HbCO

Carboxyhemoglobin

RT

Room temperature

hpf

High-­power field

SD

Standard deviation

hr

Hour, hours

sec

Second, seconds

IU

International unit(s) of
hormone activity

Tr

Trace

U

L

Liter

International unit(s) of
enzyme activity

M

Male

V

Volume

MB

Heart isoenzyme of
creatine kinase

WBC

White blood cell(s)

WHO

mEq/L

Milliequivalents per
liter

World Health
Organization

wk

Week, weeks

min

Minute, minutes

yr

Year, years

Stanley F. Lo and Stephen M. Roper
In Tables 770.1-­770.5, the reference intervals apply to infants, children,
and adolescents when possible. For many analyses, separate reference
intervals for children and adolescents are not well delineated. When
interpreting a test result, the reference interval supplied by the laboratory performing the test should always be used because these intervals
are instrument and/or method dependent. Figures 770.1 and 770.2
provide estimations related to dosages. Figure 770.3 is a nomogram for
risk assessment of hyperbilirubinemia.

Table 770.1  Prefixes Denoting Decimal Factors in Table
770.5
PREFIX

SYMBOL

FACTOR

mega-­

M

106

kilo-­

k

103

Table 770.3  Abbreviations for Specimens in Table 770.5

hecto-­

h

102

S

Serum

deka-­

da

101

P

Plasma

d

10−1

(H)

Heparin

centi-­

c

10−2

(LiH)

Lithium heparin

milli-­

m

10−3

(E)

Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA)

μ

10−6

(C)

Citrate

nano-­

n

10−9

(O)

Oxalate

pico-­

p

10−12

W

Whole blood

femto-­

f

10−15

(NH4H)

Ammonium heparinate

deci-­

micro-­

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 770 u Reference Intervals for Laboratory Tests and Procedures

4472.e9

Table 770.4  Key to Comments Section of Table 770.5
30°C, 37°C

Temperature of enzymatic analysis (Celsius)

l

Fluorometric method

a

Values obtained are significantly method dependent

m

Fluorescence-­activated cell sorting (FACS)

b

Values in older males are higher than those in older
females

n

Fluorescence polarization

c

Values in older females are higher than those in
older males

o

Gas chromatography

p

High-­performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)

d

Atomic absorption

q

Indirect fluorescence antibody (IFA) assay

e

Borate affinity chromatography

r

Ion-­selective electrode

f

Cation-­exchange chromatography

s

Nephelometry

g

Vitros, a proprietary analytic system of Ortho Clinical
Diagnostics

t

Optical density

u

Radial immunodiffusion (RID)

i

Electrophoresis

v

Radioimmunoassay (RIA)

j

Enzymatic assay

w

Spectrophotometry

k

Enzyme-­amplified immunoassay

Table 770.5  Reference Intervals*
ANALYTE OR
PROCEDURE

REFERENCE VALUES (U.S.)†

SPECIMEN

COMPLETE BLOOD COUNT
Hematocrit (HCT, Hct) W(E)

Calculated from mean
corpuscular volume
(MCV) and RBC
count (electronic
displacement or
laser)

Hemoglobin (Hb)

% of packed red
cells (V red cells/V
whole blood cells
× 100)

REFERENCE VALUES (SI)†

COMMENTS

Volume fraction (V red
cells/V whole blood)

0-­30 days

44-­70%

1-­23 mo

32-­42%

0.32-­0.42

2-­9 yr

33-­43%

0.33-­0.43

10-­17 yr M

36-­47%

0.36-­0.47

F

35-­45%

0.35-­0.45

>18-­99 yr M

42-­52%

0.42-­0.52

F

37-­47%

0.37-­0.47

g/dL

mmol/L

W(E)

P(H)

CONVERSION
FACTOR

×0.01

×0.155

0.44-­0.70

0-­30 days

15.0-­24.0

2.32-­3.72

1-­23 mo

10.5-­14.0

1.63-­2.17

2-­9 yr

11.5-­14.5

1.78-­2.25

10-­17 yr M

12.5-­16.1

1.93-­2.50

F

12.0-­15.0

1.86-­2.32

>18-­99 yr M

13.5-­18.0

2.09-­2.79

F

12.5-­16.0

1.93-­2.48

MW Hb =
64,500

See Chemical Elements

Erythrocyte indices
(RBC indices)
Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4472.e10 Part XXXIII u Laboratory Medicine
Table 770.5  Reference Intervals*—cont’d
ANALYTE OR
PROCEDURE

REFERENCE VALUES (U.S.)†

SPECIMEN

Mean corpuscular
hemoglobin (MCH)

W(E)

Mean corpuscular
hemoglobin
concentration (MCHC)
Mean corpuscular
volume (MCV)

pg/cell
1-­23 mo

24-­30

0.37-­0.46

2-­9 yr

25-­31

0.39-­0.48

10-­17 yr M

26-­32

0.26-­0.32

F

26-­32

0.26-­0.32

>18-­99 yr M

27-­31

0.27-­0.31

F

27-­31

0.27-­0.31

% Hb/cell or
g Hb/dL RBC

mmol Hb/L RBC

32-­36

Leukocyte differential

W(E)

×0.0155

×0.155

μm3

0.51-­0.60

4.96-­5.58
fL

0-­30 days

99-­115

×1

1-­23 mo

72-­88

72-­88

2-­9 yr

76-­90

76-­90

10-­17 yr

78-­95

78-­95

>18-­99 yr

78-­100

78-­100

×1,000 cells/mm3 (μL)

99-­115

×109 cells/L

0-­30 days

9.1-­34.0

1-­23 mo

6.0-­14.0

×1

6.0-­14.0

2-­9 yr

4.0-­12.0

45.0-­12.0

10-­17 yr

4.0-­10.5

4.0-­10.5

18-­99 yr

4.0-­10.5

4.0-­10.5

%

9.1-­34.0

Number fraction

Myelocytes

0%

Neutrophils (“bands”)

3-­5%

0.03-­0.05

Neutrophils (“segs”)

54-­62%

0.54-­0.62

Lymphocytes

25-­33%

0.25-­0.33

Monocytes

3-­7%

0.03-­0.07

Eosinophils

1-­3%

0.01-­0.03

Basophils

0-­0.75%

0-­0.0075

Cells/mm3 (μL)

×106 cells/L

×0.01

0

Neutrophils (“bands”)

150-­400

150-­400

Neutrophils (“segs”)

3,000-­5,800

3,000-­5,800

Lymphocytes

1,500-­3,000

1,500-­3,000

Monocytes

285-­500

285-­500

Eosinophils

50-­250

50-­250

Basophils

15-­50

15-­50

W(E)

×1

0

Myelocytes

Platelet count
(thrombocyte count)

×103/mm3 (μL)
Newborn 84-­478 (after 1 wk, same
as adult)
Adult 150-­400

COMMENTS

fmol/cell

33-­39

W(E)

W(E)

REFERENCE VALUES (SI)†

0-­30 days

W(E)

Leukocyte count
(WBC count)

CONVERSION
FACTOR

0

×109/L
×106

84-­478

(Buck, 1996)

150-­400

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 770 u Reference Intervals for Laboratory Tests and Procedures

4472.e11

Table 770.5  Reference Intervals*—cont’d
ANALYTE OR
PROCEDURE

SPECIMEN

REFERENCE VALUES (U.S.)†

CONVERSION
FACTOR

Reticulocyte count

W(E,H,O)

Adults 0.5-­1.5% of erythrocytes or
25,000-­75,000/mm3 (μL)

W(cap)

1 day

0.4-­6.0

7 days

<0.1-­1.3

<0.001-­0.013

1-­4 wk

<1.0-­1.2

<0.001-­0.012

5-­6 wk

<0.1-­2.4

<0.001-­0.024

7-­8 wk

0.1-­2.9

0.001-­0.029

9-­10 wk

<0.1-­2.6

<0.001-­0.026

11-­12 wk

0.1-­1.3

0.001-­0.013

0-­7 days

6-­40 U/L

8-­30 days M

10-­40

10-­40

F

8-­32

8-­32

1-­12 mo

12-­45

12-­45

1-­19 yr

5-­45

5-­45

Premature 1
day

1.8-­3.0 g/dL

Full term <6
days

2.5-­3.4

25-­34

8 days-­1 yr

1.9-­4.9

19-­49

1-­3 yr

3.4-­4.2

34-­42

4-­19 yr

3.5-­5.6

35-­56

×0.01
×106

%

Alanine transaminase
(aminotransferase)
(ALT, SGPT)

Albumin (BCG)

S

P

Ammonia

P

Amylase

S,P

1-­19 yr

S,P(H)

×1

×10

0.004-­0.060

6-­40 U/L

18-­30 g/dL

×1

11-­35 μmol/L

g

30-­100 U/L

×1

30-­100 U/L

(Lockitch
Halstead,
Albersheim,
1988; Gillard
et al, 1983)

% pancreatic fraction

Cord-­8 mo

0-­34%

×0.01

9 mo-­4 yr

5-­56%

0.05-­0.56%

5-­19 yr

23-­59%

0.23-­0.59%
×1

0-­0.34%

P(H)

7-­16 mEq/L

Antideoxyribonuclease
B titer (anti-­DNase B
titer)

S

Age

Upper limit of
normal

4-­6 yr

240-­480 U

7-­12 yr

480-­800 U

480-­800 U

Plasma
osmolarity
(mOsm/kg)

Plasma ADH (pg/
mL)

Plasma ADH ng/L

270-­280

<1.5

280-­285

<2.5

<2.5

285-­290

1-­5

1-­5

290-­295

2-­7

2-­7

295-­300

4-­12

4-­12

P(E)

37°C,bgw
(Soldin,
Savwoir, Guo,
1997; Lockitch
Halstead,
Albersheim,
1988)g
(Meites, 1989;
Soldin and
Morse, 1998;
Lockitch
Halstead,
Albersheim,
1988)

11-­35 μmol/L

Anion gap (sodium
− [chloride +
bicarbonate])

Antidiuretic hormone
(hADH, vasopressin)

COMMENTS

0.005-­0.015 (number
fraction) or 25,000-­75,000 ×
106/L
Number fraction

×0.01

% pancreatic
fraction
Amylase isoenzymes

REFERENCE VALUES (SI)†

7-­16 mEq/L

Upper limit of normal
×1

×1

240-­480 U

(Kaplan et al,
1998)

<1.5

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4472.e12 Part XXXIII u Laboratory Medicine
Table 770.5  Reference Intervals*—cont’d
ANALYTE OR
PROCEDURE

REFERENCE VALUES (U.S.)†

SPECIMEN

Antistreptolysin-­O
titer (ASO titer)

S

Aspartate
transaminase
(aminotransferase)
(AST, SGOT)

Upper limit of
normal

2-­5 yr

120-­160 Todd units

6-­9 yr

240 Todd units

240 Todd units

10-­12 yr

320 Todd units

320 Todd units

U/L

U/L

Bilirubin, total

×1

120-­160 Todd units

F

24-­95

24-­95

8-­30 days

22-­71

22-­71

1-­12 mo

22-­63

22-­63

1-­3 yr

20-­60

20-­60

3-­9 yr

15-­50

15-­50

10-­15 yr

10-­40

10-­40

16-­19 yr M

15-­45

15-­45

F

5-­30

5-­30

mmol/L

mmol/L
×1

(−10)-­(−2)

Infant

(−7)-­(−1)

(−7)-­(−1)

Child

(−4)-­(+2)

(−4)-­(+2)

Thereafter

(−3)-­(+3)

(−3)-­(−3)

mmol/L

mmol/L

21-­28

Venous

22-­29

22-­29

mg/dL

μmol/L

See Bhutani
nomogram (Fig.
770.3)

1 mo-­adult

<1.0

37°C,g (Soldin,
Savwoir, Guo,
1997; Lockitch
Halstead,
Albersheim,
1988)

(−10)-­(−2)

Arterial

Newborn

×1

(Kaplan et al,
1998)

35-­100

Newborn

S

C-­reactive protein
(high sensitivity)

×1

30-­100

S,P

21-­28

×17.1

(Bhutani et al,
1999)
<17

S

Calcium, ionized (Ca)

M (mg/dL)

F (mg/dL)

M (mg/L)

F (mg/L)

0-­90 days

0.08-­1.58

0.09-­1.58

0.8-­15.8

0.9-­15.8

91 days-­12 mo

0.08-­1.12

13 mo-­3 yr

0.08-­1.12

0.05-­0.79

0.8-­11.2

0.5-­7.9

0.08-­0.79

0.8-­11.2

0.8-­7.9

4-­10 yr

0.06-­0.79

0.5-­1.0

0.6-­7.9

0.5-­10.0

11-­14 yr

0.08-­0.76

0.06-­0.81

0.8-­7.6

0.6-­8.1

15-­18 yr

0.04-­0.79

0.06-­0.79

0.4-­7.9

0.6-­7.9

S,P(H),W(H)

COMMENTS

Upper limit of normal

0-­7 days M

W(H)

Bicarbonate

REFERENCE VALUES (SI)†

Age

S

Base excess

CONVERSION
FACTOR

mg/dL

×10

(Soldin et al,
2004)

mmol/L

Cord blood

5.0-­6.0

×0.25

Newborn,
3-­24 hr

4.3-­5.1

1.07-­1.27

24-­48 hr

4.0-­4.7

1.00-­1.17

Thereafter

4.8-­4.92

1.12-­1.23

or

2.24-­2.46 Eq/L

×0.5

1.25-­1.50

1.12-­1.23

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 770 u Reference Intervals for Laboratory Tests and Procedures

4472.e13

Table 770.5  Reference Intervals*—cont’d
ANALYTE OR
PROCEDURE

SPECIMEN

Calcium, total

S

Carbon dioxide,
partial pressure (Pco2)

Carbon monoxide
(carboxyhemoglobin)

Chloride

W(E)

Cortisol

CONVERSION
FACTOR

mg/dL

REFERENCE VALUES (SI)†

9.0-­11.5

Newborn,
3-­24 hr

9.0-­10.6

2.3-­2.65

24-­48 hr

7.0-­12.0

1.75-­3.00

4-­7 days

9.0-­10.9

2.25-­2.73

Child

8.8-­10.8

2.20-­2.70

Thereafter

8.4-­10.2

2.10-­2.55

×0.25

mm Hg

2.25-­2.88

kPa

Newborn

27-­40

Infant

27-­41

3.6-­5.5

Thereafter M

35-­48

4.7-­6.4

F

32-­45

4.3-­6.0

Nonsmoker

<2% HbCO

Smoker

<10%

<0.10

Lethal

>50%

>0.5

Cord blood

96-­104 mmol/L

Newborn

97-­110

97-­110

Thereafter

98-­106

98-­106

Sweat

×0.1333

×0.01

×1

3.6-­5.3

HbCO fraction <0.02

96-­104 mmol/L

(Farrell et al,
2008)

mmol/L

S,P(H)

COMMENTS

mmol/L

Cord blood

W(H)

S,P(H)

Chloride, sweat

REFERENCE VALUES (U.S.)†

≤29

CF unlikely

30-­59

Intermediate

≥60

Indicative of CF

μg/dL

nmol/L

Newborn

1-­24

Adults, 8 am

5-­23

×27.59

138-­635

4 pm

3-­15

82-­413

8 pm

<50% of 8 am

×0.01

28-­662

Fraction of 8 am
≤0.50

Creatine kinase

S

Creatine kinase
isoenzymes

Cord blood

70-­380 U/L

5-­8 hr

214-­1,175

214-­1,175

24-­33 hr

130-­1,200

130-­1,200

72-­100 hr

87-­725

87-­725

Adult

5-­130

5-­130

S

×1

% MB

% BB

Cord blood

0.3-­3.1

0.3-­10.5

5-­8 hr

1.7-­7.9

3.6-­13.4

24-­33 hr

1.8-­5

2.3-­8.6

72-­100 hr

1.4-­5.4

5.1-­13.3

Adult

0-­2

0

70-­380 U/L

30°C,b (Jedeikin
et al, 1982)

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4472.e14 Part XXXIII u Laboratory Medicine
Table 770.5  Reference Intervals*—cont’d
ANALYTE OR
PROCEDURE

REFERENCE VALUES (U.S.)†

SPECIMEN

CONVERSION
FACTOR

REFERENCE VALUES (SI)†

COMMENTS

μmol/L

g

Creatinine (IDMS)
Enzymatic

S,P

Creatinine clearance
(endogenous)

S,P,U

mg/dL
0-­4 yr

0.03-­0.50

4-­7 yr

0.03-­0.59

×88.4

2.65-­44.2
2.65-­52.2

7-­10 yr

0.22-­0.59

19.4-­52.2

10-­14 yr

0.31-­0.88

27.4-­77.8

>14 yr

0.50-­1.06

44.2-­93.7

Newborn 40-­65 mL/min/1.73 m2
<40 yr, M 97-­137
F 88-­128
Decreases <6.5 mL/min/decade

Ferritin

S

Folate

S

W(E)
Glucose

ng/mL

μg/L

0-­6 wk

0-­400

7 wk-­365 days

10-­95

×1

0-­400
10-­95

1-­9 yr

10-­60

10-­60

10-­18 yr M

10-­300

10-­300

F

10-­70

10-­70

Newborn 7.0-­32 ng/mL

×2.265

15.9-­72.4 nmol/L

Thereafter 1.8-­9.0

4.1-­20.4

150-­450 ng/mL RBCs

340-­1,020 nmol/L cells

S

mg/dL

mmol/L

Cord blood

45-­96

×0.0555

2.5-­5.3

Premature

20-­60

1.1-­3.3

Neonate

30-­60

1.7-­3.3

1 day

40-­60

2.2-­3.3

>1 day

50-­90

2.8-­5.0

Child

60-­100

3.3-­5.5

Adult

70-­105

3.9-­5.8

Adult

65-­95

3.6-­5.3

Newborn

W(H)
Glucose tolerance test S
(GTT) (see Chapter
629)

mg/dL

mmol/L

Oral dose
Adult: 75 g

Normal

Diabetic

Child: 1.75 g/kg of
ideal weight, up to a
maximum of 75 g

Fasting

70-­105

≥126

120 min

70-­120

≥200

G6PD in erythrocytes

W(E,H,C)

Bishop, modified

Adult

×0.0555

Normal

Diabetic

3.9-­5.8

≥7.0

3.9-­6.7

≥11

Adult

3.4-­8.0 U/g Hb

×0.0645

0.22-­0.52 mU/mol Hb

98.6-­232 U/1012 RBCs

×10−3

0.10-­0.23 nU/106 RBCs

1.16-­2.72 U/mL RBC

×1

1.16-­2.72 kU/L RBC

Newborn: 50% higher

(Diabetes Care,
2019)

Newborn: 50% higher

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 770 u Reference Intervals for Laboratory Tests and Procedures

4472.e15

Table 770.5  Reference Intervals*—cont’d
ANALYTE OR
PROCEDURE

SPECIMEN

γ-­Glutamyl
transpeptidase (GGT,
GGTP)

Immunoglobulin A
(IgA)

REFERENCE VALUES (U.S.)†

S

U/L

S

Immunoglobulin E
(IgE)

S

37-­193

0-­1 mo

13-­147

13-­147

1-­2 mo

12-­123

12-­123

2-­4 mo

8-­90

8-­90

4 mo-­10 yr

5-­32

5-­32

10-­15 yr

5-­24

5-­24

mg/dL

mg/L

×1

×10

Immunoglobulin M
(IgM)

1.4-­3.6

1-­3 mo

1.3-­53

13-­530

4-­6 mo

4.4-­84

44-­840

7 mo-­1 yr

11-­106

110-­1,060

2-­5 yr

14-­159

140-­1,590

6-­10 yr

33-­236

330-­2,360

Adult

70-­312

700-­3,120

Newborn: none detected
×10

0-­80 mg/L

×1

0-­230 kIU/L

s (Meites, 1989)

0-­170
mg/dL

g/L

Cord blood

636-­1,606

1 mo

251-­906

2.51-­9.06

2-­4 mo

176-­601

1.76-­6.01

5-­12 mo

172-­1,069

1.72-­10.69

1-­5 yr

345-­1,236

3.45-­12.36

6-­10 yr

608-­1,572

6.08-­15.72

Adult

639-­1,349

6.39-­13.49

mg/dL

mg/L

S

37°C,b (Knight
and Haymond,
1981)

None detected

M 0-­230 IU/mL

×0.01

6.3-­25

1-­4 mo

17-­105

170-­1,050

5-­9 mo

33-­126

330-­1,260

10 mo-­1 yr

41-­173

410-­1,730

2-­8 yr

43-­207

430-­2,070

9-­10 yr

52-­242

520-­2,420

Adult

56-­352

All ages

22-­184 μg/dL

Iron-­binding capacity,
total (TIBC)

S

Infant 100-­400 μg/dL

l-­lactate (perchloric

W

×10

6.36-­16.06

Cord blood

P

d-­lactate

14-­36

Thereafter: 0-­8 mg/dL

Iron

acid)

37-­193

Cord blood

S

COMMENTS

U/L

F 0-­170
Immunoglobulin G
(IgG)

REFERENCE VALUES (SI)†

Cord blood

S

Immunoglobulin D
(IgD)

CONVERSION
FACTOR

63-­250

s (Meites, 1989)

s(Meites, 1989)

560-­3,520
×0.1791

4-­33 μmol/L

×0.179

17.90-­71.60 μmol/L

Thereafter 250-­400

44.75-­71.60

mg/dL

(Lockitch
Halstead,
Wadsworth,
1988)

mmol/L

1-­12 mo

10-­21

×1

1.1-­2.3

1-­7 yr

7-­14

0.8-­1.5

7-­15 yr

5-­8

0.6-­0.9

(Bonnefont et al,
1990)

j(Rosenthal and

P(H)
6 mo-­3 yr

0.0-­0.3

×1

0.0-­0.3

Pesce, 1985)

Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4472.e16 Part XXXIII u Laboratory Medicine
Table 770.5  Reference Intervals*—cont’d
ANALYTE OR
PROCEDURE

SPECIMEN

Lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH)

Isoenzymes

REFERENCE VALUES (U.S.)†

S

U/L

P,S

Magnesium

P(H)

×1

1-­9 yr

150-­500

150-­500

10-­19 yr

120-­330

120-­330

S

37°C,a (Meites,
1989)

170-­580

% of total activity
1-­6 yr

7-­19 yr

LD1

20-­38

20-­35

LD2

27-­38

31-­38

LD3

16-­26

19-­28

LD4

5-­16

7-­13

LD5

3-­13

5-­12

μg/dL

mmol/L

Child

<3.5*

Initiate
chelation
therapy

≥70

×0.0483

1-­18 yr

145-­216 U/L

×1

mg/dL
0-­6 days

1.2-­2.6

7 days-­2 yr

1.6-­2.6

2-­14 yr

1.5-­2.3

<0.0024
≥3.38

145-­216 U/L

(Ghoshal and
Soldin, 2003)

mmol/L
×0.411

gw(Meites, 1989)

0.48-­1.05
0.65-­1.05
0.60-­0.95

0.78 ± 0.37% of total Hb
Osmolality

COMMENTS

U/L

170-­580

W(H)

Lipase

REFERENCE VALUES (SI)†

<1 yr

S

Lead

CONVERSION
FACTOR

×0.01

0.0078 ± 0.0037 (mass fraction)

Child, adult
275-­295 mOsm/kg H2O

Phosphatase, alkaline

Phosphorus, inorganic

Potassium

S

U/L
1-­9 yr

145-­420

10-­11 yr

140-­560

37°C,aw

145-­420
140-­560

M

F

M

F

12-­13 yr

200-­495

105-­420

200-­495

105-­420

14-­15 yr

130-­525

70-­230

130-­525

70-­230

16-­19 yr

65-­260

50-­130

65-­260

50-­130

S,P(H)

mg/dL

mmol/L

0-­5 days

4.8-­8.2

1-­3 yr

3.8-­6.5

1.25-­2.10

4-­11 yr

3.7-­5.6

1.20-­1.80

12-­15 yr

2.9-­5.4

0.95-­1.75

16-­19 yr

2.7-­4.7

0.90-­1.50

S

P(H)

U/L
×1

×0.3229

mmol/L

1.55-­2.65

mmol/L

0-­1 wk

3.2-­5.5

1 wk-­1 mo

3.4-­6.0

3.4-­6.0

1-­6 mo

3.5-­5.6

3.5-­5.6

6 mo-­1 yr

3.5-­6.1

3.5-­6.1

>1 yr

3.3-­4.6

3.3-­4.6

3.5-­
4.5 mmol/L

w(Meites, 1989)

×1

3.3-­5.5

(Greeley et al,
1993)
Increased by
hemolysis;
serum values
systematically
higher than
plasma values

3.5-­4.5 mmol/L

*https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/blood-lead-levels.htm

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 770 u Reference Intervals for Laboratory Tests and Procedures

4472.e17

Table 770.5  Reference Intervals*—cont’d
ANALYTE OR
PROCEDURE

SPECIMEN

Prealbumin
(transthyretin)

REFERENCE VALUES (U.S.)†

S

Protein, total

mg/dL

W

Sodium

S,P (LiH,
NH4H)

Thyroid-­stimulating
hormone (TSH)

P

1-­5 yr

14.0-­30.0

140-­300

6-­9 yr

15.0-­30.0

150-­300

10-­13 yr

20.0-­36.0

200-­360

14-­19

22.0-­45.0

220-­450

Thyroxine-­binding
globulin (TBG)

S

Thyroxine (T4), total

×10

g/dL

60-­210

4.3-­7.6

Newborn

4.6-­7.4

46-­74

1-­7 yr

6.1-­7.9

61-­79

8-­12 yr

6.4-­8.1

64-­81

13-­19 yr

6.6-­8.2

66-­82

7-­17 yr

0.076 ±
0.026 mmol/L

×10

×1

mmol/L

43-­76

0.076 ± 0.026 mmol/L

Halstead,
Quigley, 1988)

(Meites, 1989)

(Pianosi et al,
1995)

mmol/L

Newborn

133-­146

Infant

134-­144

134-­144

Child

134-­143

134-­143

Thereafter

135-­145

135-­145

mIU/L

mIU/L

×1

×1

133-­146

0-­3 days

1.00-­20.00

4-­30 days

0.5-­6.5

0.50-­6.50

1-­5 mo

0.5-­6.0

0.5-­6.0

6 mo-­18 yr

0.5-­4.5

0.5-­4.5
×2.759

mg/dL

1.0-­20.00

g(Greeley et al,

1993)

g(Dugaw et al,

2001)

14-­165 pmol/L
mg/L

Cord blood

1.4-­9.4

1-­4 wk

1.0-­9.0

10-­90

1-­12 mo

2.0-­7.6

20-­76

1-­5 yr

2.9-­5.4

29-­54

5-­10 yr

2.5-­5.0

25-­50

10-­15 yr

2.1-­4.6

21-­46

Adult

1.5-­3.4

15-­34

μg/dL

nmol/L

S

s(Lockitch,

g/L

Premature

5-­60 pg/mL

COMMENTS

mg/L

6.0-­21.0

S

Thyrotropin-­releasing
hormone (TRH)

REFERENCE VALUES (SI)†

0-­5 days

S

Pyruvate (perchloric
acid)

CONVERSION
FACTOR

×10

×12.9

14-­94

0-­3 days

8.0-­20.0

103-­258

3-­30 days

5.0-­15.0

64-­193

31-­365 days

6.0-­14.0

77-­180

1-­5 yr

4.5-­11.0

58-­142

6-­18 yr

4.5-­10.0

58-­129

g(Dugaw et al,

2001)

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4472.e18 Part XXXIII u Laboratory Medicine
Table 770.5  Reference Intervals*—cont’d
ANALYTE OR
PROCEDURE

SPECIMEN

Thyroxine (T4), free

S

Thyroxine (T4), total

W

Triiodothyronine (T3),
free

S

Triiodothyronine (T3),
total

REFERENCE VALUES (U.S.)†
ng/dL

Uric acid

REFERENCE VALUES (SI)†

2.00-­5.00

3-­30 days

0.90-­2.20

11.6-­28.3

31 days-­18 yr

0.7-­2.00

9.0-­25.7

Newborn
screen (filter
paper)
6.2-­22.0 μg/
dL

×12.9

×12.9

pg/dL

25.7-­64.3

20-­240
200-­610

3.1-­9.4

6 wk

240-­560

3.7-­8.6

Adult (20-­
50 yr)

230-­660

3.5-­10.0

×0.01536

ng/dL
60-­300

0.3-­3.7

nmol/L
×0.0154

0.9-­4.7

90-­260

1.4-­4.0

1-­6 yr

90-­240

1.4-­3.7

7-­11 yr

90-­230

1.4-­3.6

12-­18 yr

100-­210

1.5-­3.3

mg/dL

mmol/L

S,P
Cord blood

21-­40

Premature
(1 wk)

3-­25

1.1-­9.0

Newborn

3-­12

1.1-­4.3

infant or child

5-­18

1.8-­6.4

Thereafter

7-­18

2.5-­6.4

mg/dL

μmol/L

S

2001)

pmol/L

1-­3 days

0-­3 days

g(Dugaw et al,

80-­283 nmol/L

Cord blood

S

COMMENTS

pmol/L

0-­3 days

4-­365 days

Urea nitrogen

CONVERSION
FACTOR

×0.357

×59.48

g(Dugaw et al,

2001)

7.5-­14.3

1-­3 yr

1.8-­5.0

100-­300

4-­6 yr

2.2-­4.7

130-­280

7-­9 yr

2.0-­5.0

120-­295

10-­11 yr M

2.3-­5.4

135-­320

10-­11 yr F

3.0-­4.7

180-­280

12-­13 yr M

2.7-­6.7

160-­400

14-­15 yr M

2.4-­7.8

140-­465

12-­15 yr F

3.0-­5.8

180-­345

16-­19 yr M

4.0-­8.6

235-­510

16-­19 yr F

3.0-­5.9

180-­350

(Lockitch
Halstead,
Albersheim,
1988)

*In preparing the reference range listings, a number of abbreviations, symbols, and codes were used (see Table 770.2).
†Reference values are shown in SI units (International System of Units) and U.S. units (Traditional Units).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 770 u Reference Intervals for Laboratory Tests and Procedures
25

Nomogram

90
80
70

90
85
80
75
70

220
200
190
180
170
160
150
140
130

.80
40

Weight in pounds

120
45
40
35

80

30
28
26
24

70
60
50

40

.60
.55
.50
.45

20

.40
15

.35
.30

10
9
8

.25

7

22

6

20
19
18
17
16
15
14
13

5

.20

0.8
0.7

Weight
lb kg
180
160
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
45
40
35
30

0.6

25

0.5

20
18
16
14

0.4

80
70
60
50
40
30
25
20
15

10
9.0
8.0
7.0
6.0

12
0.3

0.2

4

5.0

10
9
8
7
6

4.0
3.0
2.5

5

2.0

.15

4

3

1.5

3
.10

12

30

.70

30

50

90

2.0
1.9
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.0
0.9

.90

50

55

100

1.30
1.20
1.10
1.00

60

65
60

110

M2

Surface area in square meters

240

For children of
normal height
for weight

S.A.

Fig. 770.1 Nomogram for the estimation of surface area. The sur-

face area is indicated where a straight line that connects the height
and weight levels intersects the surface area column, or if the patient is
roughly of average size, from the weight alone (enclosed area). (Nomogram modified from the data of E. Boyd by CD West. See also Briars
GL, Bailey BJ. Surface area estimation: pocket calculator v nomogram.
Arch Dis Child. 1994;70:246–247.)
2.0

Pounds to square meter (m2)

Surface area m2

1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

0

20

40

60

80

Percent adult dose

105
100
94
88
82
76
71
65
59
53
47
41
35
30
24
18
12
6

1.6

High-risk zone

95th percentile

15
erm

kz

ris

te-

ia
ed

nt
hi

tile
e
on 75th percen
le

one40th percenti

kz

-ris

ate
edi

Hig
rm
inte
Low

10

Low-risk zone

5

0

0

12

24

36

48

60

72 84 96 108 120 132 144 156 168
Age (hr)

Fig. 770.3 Nomogram for risk assessment of hyperbilirubinemia.

(From Bhutani VK, Johnson L, Sivieri EM. Predictive ability of a predischarge hour-­specific serum bilirubin for subsequent significant hyperbilirubinemia in healthy term and near-­term newborns. Pediatrics.
1999;103:6−14. Fig 2.)

Bibliography (for Table 770.5)

Alternative (Mosteller’s formula):
Surface area (m2)  Height (cm)  Weight (kg)
3600

1.8

20

1.0

0.1

2

Total serum bilirubin (mg/dL)

Height
cm in

4472.e19

100 120 140 160

Body weight—pounds

Fig. 770.2 Relationships between body weight (lb), body surface
area, and adult dosage. The surface area values correspond with those
set forth by Crawford JD, Terry ME, Rourke GM. Simplification of drug
dosage calculation by application of the surface area principle. Pediatrics. 1950;5:783–790. Note that the 100% adult dose is for a patient
weighing approximately 140 lb and having a surface area of approximately 1.7 m2. (From Talbot NB, Richie RH, Crawford JH. Metabolic
homeostasis: a syllabus for those concerned with the care of patients.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1959.)

American Diabetes Association. Classification and diagnosis of Diabetes: Standards
of Medical care in Diabetes -­2019. Diabetes Care. 2019;42:S13–S28.
Bhutani VK, Johnson L, Sivieri EM. Predictive ability of a predischarge hour-­specific
serum bilirubin for subsequent significant hyperbilirubinemia in healthy term and
near-­term newborns. Pediatrics. 1999;103:6–14.
Bonnefont JP, Specola NB, Vassault A, et al. The fasting test in children: application to the diagnosis of pathological hypo-­and hyperketotic state. Eur J Pediatr.
1990;150:80–85.
Buck ML. Anticoagulation with warfarin in infants and children. Ann Pharmacother.
1996;30:1316–1322.
Diaz J, Tornel PL, Martinez P. Reference intervals for blood ammonia in healthy subjects, determined by microdiffusion. Clin Chem. 1995;41:1048.
Dugaw KA, Jack RM, Rutledge J. Pediatric reference ranges for TSH, free T4, total
T4, total T3 and T3 uptake on the VitrosECi analyzer. Clin Chem. 2001;47:A108.
E. Endocrinology, C. Hills, CA 91301.
Farrell PM, Rosenstein BJ, White TB, et al. Guidelines for diagnosis of cystic fibrosis
in newborns through older adults: Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Consensus Report.
J Pediatr. 2008;153:S4–S14.
Ghoshal A, Soldin S. Evaluation of the Dade Behring dimension R × L: integrated
chemistry system, pediatric reference ranges. Clin Chim Acta. 2003;331:135–146.
Gillard BK, Simbala JA, Goodglick L. Reference intervals for amylase isoenzymes in
serum and plasma of infants and children. Clin Chem. 1983;29:1119–1123.
Greeley C, Snell J, Colaco A, et al. Pediatric reference ranges for electrolytes and creatinine. Clin Chem. 1993;39:1172.
Jedeikin R, Makela SK, Shennan AT, et al. Creatine kinase isoenzymes in serum from
cord blood and the blood of healthy full-­term infants during the first three postnatal days. Clin Chem. 1982;28:317–322.
Kaplan EL, Rothermel CD, Johnson DR. Antistreptolysin O and anti-­
deoxyribonuclease B titers: normal values for children ages 2 to 12 in the United
States. Pediatrics. 1998;101:86–88.
Knight JA, Haymond RE. γ-­Glutamyltransferase and alkaline phosphatase activities
compared in serum of normal children and children with liver disease. Clin Chem.
1981;27:48–51.
Lockitch G, Halstead AC, Albersheim S, et al. Age-­and sex-­specific pediatric reference intervals for biochemistry analytes as measured with the Ektachem-­700
analyzer. Clin Chem. 1988;34:1622–1625.
Lockitch G, Halstead AC, Quigley G, et al. Age-­and sex-­specific pediatric reference
intervals: study design and methods illustrated by measurement of serum proteins
with the Behring LN nephelometer. Clin Chem. 1988;34:1618–1621.
Lockitch G, Halstead AC, Wadsworth L, et al. Age-­and sex-­specific pediatric reference intervals and correlations for zinc, copper, selenium, iron, vitamins A and E,
and related proteins. Clin Chem. 1988;34:1625–1628.
Meites S, ed. Pediatric Clinical Chemistry, Reference (normal) Values. 3rd ed. Washington, DC: American Association for Clinical Chemistry; 1989.
Muntau A, Streiter M, Kappler M, et al. Age-­related reference values for serum selenium concentrations in infants and children. Clin Chem. 2002;48:555–560.
Nichols I. Diagnostics. San Juan Capistrano, CA 92675.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4472.e20 Part XXXIII u Laboratory Medicine
Nir A, Bar-­Oz B, Perles Z, et al. N-­terminal pro-­B-­type natriuretic peptide: reference
plasma levels from birth to adolescence: elevated levels at birth and in infants and
children with heart diseases. Acta Paediatr. 2004;93:603–607.
Pianosi P, Seargeant L, Haworth JC. Blood lactate and pyruvate concentrations, and
their ratio during exercise in healthy children: developmental perspective. Eur J
Appl Physiol Occup Physiol. 1995;71:518–522.
Rosenthal P, Pesce MA. Long-­term monitoring of d-­lactic acidosis in a child. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 1985;4:674–676. 1985.
Sherry B, Jack RM, Weber A, et al. Reference interval for prealbumin for children 2 to
36 months old. Clin Chem. 1988;34:1878–1880.
Soldin SJ, Morse AS. Pediatric reference ranges for albumin and total protein in children <1 year old using the Vitros 500 analyzer. Clin Chem. 1998;44:A15.

Soldin SJ, Savwoir TV, Guo Y. Pediatric reference ranges for alkaline phosphatase,
aspartate aminotransferase, and alanine aminotransferase in children less than 1
year old on the Vitros 500. Clin Chem. 1997;43:S199.
Soldin SJ, Brugnara C, Wong ED, eds. Pediatric Reference Intervals. 5th ed. Washington, DC: American Association for Clinical Chemistry; 2005.
Soldin O, Bierbower L, Choi J, et al. Serum iron, ferritin, transferrin, total iron binding capacity, hs-­CRP, LDL cholesterol and magnesium in children: new reference
intervals using the Dade Dimension Clinical Chemistry System. Clin Chim Acta.
2004;342:211–217.
Soldin SJ, Hicks JM, Bailey J, et al. Pediatric reference ranges for 25-­hydroxy vitamin
D during the summer and winter. Clin Chem. 1997;43:S200.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

